and he said unto the woman, yea, hath god said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?
and the lord god called unto adam, and said unto him, where art thou?
and he said, who told thee that thou wast naked?
hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof i commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?
and the lord god said unto the woman, what is this that thou hast done?
and the lord said unto cain, why art thou wroth?
and why is thy countenance fallen?
if thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted?
and the lord said unto cain, where is abel thy brother?
and he said, i know not: am i my brother's keeper?
and he said, what hast thou done?
and pharaoh called abram and said, what is this that thou hast done unto me?
why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife?
why saidst thou, she is my sister?
is not the whole land before thee?
and abram said, lord god, what wilt thou give me, seeing i go childless, and the steward of my house is this eliezer of damascus?
and he said, lord god, whereby shall i know that i shall inherit it?
and he said, hagar, sarai's maid, whence camest thou?
and whither wilt thou go?
and she called the name of the lord that spake unto her, thou god seest me: for she said, have i also here looked after him that seeth me?
then abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old?and shall sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?
and they said unto him, where is sarah thy wife?
therefore sarah laughed within herself, saying, after i am waxed old shall i have pleasure, my lord being old also?
and the lord said unto abraham, wherefore did sarah laugh, saying, shall i of a surety bear a child, which am old?
is any thing too hard for the lord?
and the lord said, shall i hide from abraham that thing which i do; seeing that abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?
and abraham drew near, and said, wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked?
peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein?
that be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee: shall not the judge of all the earth do right?
and abraham answered and said, behold now, i have taken upon me to speak unto the lord, which am but dust and ashes: peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of five?
but before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter: and they called unto lot, and said unto him, where are the men which came in to thee this night?
and the men said unto lot, hast thou here any besides?
and lot said unto them, oh, not so, my lord: behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life; and i cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and i die: behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one: oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a little one?
but abimelech had not come near her: and he said, lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation?
said he not unto me, she is my sister?
then abimelech called abraham, and said unto him, what hast thou done unto us?
and what have i offended thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin?
and abimelech said unto abraham, what sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing?
and she said, who would have said unto abraham, that sarah should have given children suck?
and god heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of god called to hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, what aileth thee, hagar?
and abimelech said unto abraham, what mean these seven ewe lambs which thou hast set by themselves?
and he said, behold the fire and the wood: but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?
and ephron answered abraham, saying unto him, my lord, hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver; what is that betwixt me and thee?
and the servant said unto him, peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land: must i needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest?
and it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold; and said, whose daughter art thou?
tell me, i pray thee: is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?
and he said, come in, thou blessed of the lord; wherefore standest thou without?
and i asked her, and said, whose daughter art thou?
and they called rebekah, and said unto her, wilt thou go with this man?
for she had said unto the servant, what man is this that walketh in the field to meet us?
and the children struggled together within her; and she said, if it be so, why am i thus?
and esau said, behold, i am at the point to die: and what profit shall this birthright do to me?
and abimelech called isaac, and said, behold, of a surety she is thy wife; and how saidst thou, she is my sister?
and abimelech said, what is this thou hast done unto us?
and isaac said unto them, wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me, and have sent me away from you?
and he came unto his father, and said, my father: and he said, here am i; who art thou, my son?
and isaac said unto his son, how is it that thou hast found it so quickly, my son?
and he said, art thou my very son esau?
and isaac his father said unto him, who art thou?
and isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, who?
where is he that hath taken venison, and brought it me, and i have eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed him?
and he said, is not he rightly named jacob?
and he said, hast thou not reserved a blessing for me?
and isaac answered and said unto esau, behold, i have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have i given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have i sustained him: and what shall i do now unto thee, my son?
and esau said unto his father, hast thou but one blessing, my father?
now therefore, my son, obey my voice; arise, flee thou to laban my brother to haran; and tarry with him a few days, until thy brother's fury turn away; until thy brother's anger turn away from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him: then i will send, and fetch thee from thence: why should i be deprived also of you both in one day?
and rebekah said to isaac, i am weary of my life because of the daughters of heth: if jacob take a wife of the daughters of heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?
and jacob said unto them, my brethren, whence be ye?
and he said unto them, know ye laban the son of nahor?
and he said unto them, is he well?
and laban said unto jacob, because thou art my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought?
tell me, what shall thy wages be?
and it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it was leah: and he said to laban, what is this thou hast done unto me?
did not i serve with thee for rachel?
wherefore then hast thou beguiled me?
and jacob's anger was kindled against rachel: and he said, am i in god's stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
and she said unto her, is it a small matter that thou hast taken my husband?
and wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also?
for it was little which thou hadst before i came, and it is now increased unto a multitude; and the lord hath blessed thee since my coming: and now when shall i provide for mine own house also? and he said, what shall i give thee?
and rachel and leah answered and said unto him, is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?
are we not counted of him strangers?
and laban said to jacob, what hast thou done, that thou hast stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as captives taken with the sword?
wherefore didst thou flee away secretly, and steal away from me; and didst not tell me, that i might have sent thee away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp?and hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters?
and now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore longedst after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my gods?
and jacob was wroth, and chode with laban: and jacob answered and said to laban, what is my trespass?
what is my sin, that thou hast so hotly pursued after me?
whereas thou hast searched all my stuff, what hast thou found of all thy household stuff?
and laban answered and said unto jacob, these daughters are my daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my cattle, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can i do this day unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born?
and he commanded the foremost, saying, when esau my brother meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, whose art thou?
and whither goest thou?
and whose are these before thee?
and he said unto him, what is thy name?and he said, wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name?
and he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children; and said, who are those with thee?
and he said, what meanest thou by all this drove which i met?
and he said, what needeth it?
shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of their's be our's?
and they said, should he deal with our sister as with an harlot?
and his brethren said to him, shalt thou indeed reign over us?
or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us?
and he told it to his father, and to his brethren: and his father rebuked him, and said unto him, what is this dream that thou hast dreamed?
shall i and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?
and israel said unto joseph, do not thy brethren feed the flock in shechem?
and a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in the field: and the man asked him, saying, what seekest thou?
and judah said unto his brethren, what profit is it if we slay our brother, and conceal his blood?
and he returned unto his brethren, and said, the child is not; and i, whither shall i go?
) and she said, what wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come in unto me?and she said, wilt thou give me a pledge, till thou send it? and he said, what pledge shall i give thee?
then he asked the men of that place, saying, where is the harlot, that was openly by the way side?
and it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his brother came out: and she said, how hast thou broken forth?
but he refused, and said unto his master's wife, behold, my master wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand; there is none greater in this house than i; neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou art his wife: how then can i do this great wickedness, and sin against god?
and he asked pharaoh's officers that were with him in the ward of his lord's house, saying, wherefore look ye so sadly to day?
and joseph said unto them, do not interpretations belong to god?
and pharaoh said unto his servants, can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the spirit of god is?
now when jacob saw that there was corn in egypt, jacob said unto his sons, why do ye look one upon another?
and joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them, whence come ye?
and reuben answered them, saying, spake i not unto you, saying, do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear?
and he said unto his brethren, my money is restored; and, lo, it is even in my sack: and their heart failed them, and they were afraid, saying one to another, what is this that god hath done unto us?
and israel said, wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother?
and they said, the man asked us straitly of our state, and of our kindred, saying, is your father yet alive?
have ye another brother?
and we told him according to the tenor of these words: could we certainly know that he would say, bring your brother down?
and he asked them of their welfare, and said, is your father well, the old man of whom ye spake?
is he yet alive?
and he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother benjamin, his mother's son, and said, is this your younger brother, of whom ye spake unto me?
and when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off, joseph said unto his steward, up, follow after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good?
is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby indeed he divineth?
and they said unto him, wherefore saith my lord these words?
god forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing: behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought again unto thee out of the land of canaan: how then should we steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold?
and joseph said unto them, what deed is this that ye have done?wot ye not that such a man as i can certainly divine?
and judah said, what shall we say unto my lord?
what shall we speak?
or how shall we clear ourselves?
my lord asked his servants, saying, have ye a father, or a brother?
for how shall i go up to my father, and the lad be not with me?
and joseph said unto his brethren, i am joseph; doth my father yet live?
and it shall come to pass, when pharaoh shall call you, and shall say, what is your occupation?
and pharaoh said unto his brethren, what is your occupation?
and pharaoh said unto jacob, how old art thou?
and when money failed in the land of egypt, and in the land of canaan, all the egyptians came unto joseph, and said, give us bread: for why should we die in thy presence?
when that year was ended, they came unto him the second year, and said unto him, we will not hide it from my lord, how that our money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle; there is not ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands: wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land?
and israel beheld joseph's sons, and said, who are these?
judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?
and joseph said unto them, fear not: for am i in the place of god?
and the king of egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them, why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men children alive?
then said his sister to pharaoh's daughter, shall i go and call to thee a nurse of the hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee?
and when he went out the second day, behold, two men of the hebrews strove together: and he said to him that did the wrong, wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?
and he said, who made thee a prince and a judge over us?
intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the egyptian?
and when they came to reuel their father, he said, how is it that ye are come so soon to day?
and he said unto his daughters, and where is he?
why is it that ye have left the man?
and moses said unto god, who am i, that i should go unto pharaoh, and that i should bring forth the children of israel out of egypt?
and moses said unto god, behold, when i come unto the children of israel, and shall say unto them, the god of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, what is his name?
what shall i say unto them?
and the lord said unto him, what is that in thine hand?
and the lord said unto him, who hath made man's mouth?
or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind?
have not i the lord?
and the anger of the lord was kindled against moses, and he said, is not aaron the levite thy brother?
and pharaoh said, who is the lord, that i should obey his voice to let israel go?
and the king of egypt said unto them, wherefore do ye, moses and aaron, let the people from their works?
and the officers of the children of israel, which pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, wherefore have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick both yesterday and to day, as heretofore?
then the officers of the children of israel came and cried unto pharaoh, saying, wherefore dealest thou thus with thy servants?
and moses returned unto the lord, and said, lord, wherefore hast thou so evil entreated this people?
why is it that thou hast sent me?
and moses spake before the lord, saying, behold, the children of israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips?
and moses said before the lord, behold, i am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall pharaoh hearken unto me?
and moses said unto pharaoh, glory over me: when shall i intreat for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the frogs from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river only?
and moses said, it is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the egyptians to the lord our god: lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone us?
as yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt not let them go?
and moses and aaron came in unto pharaoh, and said unto him, thus saith the lord god of the hebrews, how long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before me?
and pharaoh's servants said unto him, how long shall this man be a snare unto us?
let the men go, that they may serve the lord their god: knowest thou not yet that egypt is destroyed?
and moses and aaron were brought again unto pharaoh: and he said unto them, go, serve the lord your god: but who are they that shall go?
and it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto you, what mean ye by this service?
and it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, what is this?
and it was told the king of egypt that the people fled: and the heart of pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people, and they said, why have we done this, that we have let israel go from serving us?
and they said unto moses, because there were no graves in egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness?
wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of egypt?
is not this the word that we did tell thee in egypt, saying, let us alone, that we may serve the egyptians?
and the lord said unto moses, wherefore criest thou unto me?
who is like unto thee, o lord, among the gods?
who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?
and the people murmured against moses, saying, what shall we drink?
and moses and aaron said unto all the children of israel, at even, then ye shall know that the lord hath brought you out from the land of egypt: and in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of the lord; for that he heareth your murmurings against the lord: and what are we, that ye murmur against us?
and moses said, this shall be, when the lord shall give you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to the full; for that the lord heareth your murmurings which ye murmur against him: and what are we?
and the lord said unto moses, how long refuse ye to keep my commandments and my laws?
and moses said unto them, why chide ye with me?
wherefore do ye tempt the lord?
and the people thirsted there for water; and the people murmured against moses, and said, wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up out of egypt, to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst?
and moses cried unto the lord, saying, what shall i do unto this people?
and he called the name of the place massah, and meribah, because of the chiding of the children of israel, and because they tempted the lord, saying, is the lord among us, or not?
and when moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people, he said, what is this thing that thou doest to the people?
why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto even?
if thou at all take thy neighbour's raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down: for that is his covering only, it is his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep?
and moses besought the lord his god, and said, lord, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth out of the land of egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand?wherefore should the egyptians speak, and say, for mischief did he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth?
and moses said unto aaron, what did this people unto thee, that thou hast brought so great a sin upon them?
and when moses saw that the people were naked; (for aaron had made them naked unto their shame among their enemies:) then moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, who is on the lord's side?
for wherein shall it be known here that i and thy people have found grace in thy sight?
is it not in that thou goest with us?
and moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and, behold, it was burnt: and he was angry with eleazar and ithamar, the sons of aaron which were left alive, saying, wherefore have ye not eaten the sin offering in the holy place, seeing it is most holy, and god hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement for them before the lord?
and aaron said unto moses, behold, this day have they offered their sin offering and their burnt offering before the lord; and such things have befallen me: and if i had eaten the sin offering to day, should it have been accepted in the sight of the lord?
and if ye shall say, what shall we eat the seventh year?
and there were certain men, who were defiled by the dead body of a man, that they could not keep the passover on that day: and they came before moses and before aaron on that day: and those men said unto him, we are defiled by the dead body of a man: wherefore are we kept back, that we may not offer an offering of the lord in his appointed season among the children of israel?
and the mixt multitude that was among them fell a lusting: and the children of israel also wept again, and said, who shall give us flesh to eat?
and moses said unto the lord, wherefore hast thou afflicted thy servant?
and wherefore have i not found favour in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all this people upon me?
have i conceived all this people?
have i begotten them, that thou shouldest say unto me, carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father beareth the sucking child, unto the land which thou swarest unto their fathers? whence should i have flesh to give unto all this people?
and say thou unto the people, sanctify yourselves against to morrow, and ye shall eat flesh: for ye have wept in the ears of the lord, saying, who shall give us flesh to eat?
ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days; but even a whole month, until it come out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you: because that ye have despised the lord which is among you, and have wept before him, saying, why came we forth out of egypt?
shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them, to suffice them?
or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them, to suffice them?
and the lord said unto moses, is the lord's hand waxed short?
and moses said unto him, enviest thou for my sake?
and they said, hath the lord indeed spoken only by moses?
hath he not spoken also by us?
with him will i speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant moses?
and the lord said unto moses, if her father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days?
and wherefore hath the lord brought us unto this land, to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children should be a prey?
were it not better for us to return into egypt?
and the lord said unto moses, how long will this people provoke me?
and how long will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs which i have shewed among them?
and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, how long shall i bear with this evil congregation, which murmur against me?
and moses said, wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment of the lord?
now korah, the son of izhar, the son of kohath, the son of levi, and dathan and abiram, the sons of eliab, and on, the son of peleth, sons of reuben, took men: and they rose up before moses, with certain of the children of israel, two hundred and fifty princes of the assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown: and they gathered themselves together against moses and against aaron, and said unto them, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the lord is among them: wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the lord?
and moses said unto korah, hear, i pray you, ye sons of levi: seemeth it but a small thing unto you, that the god of israel hath separated you from the congregation of israel, to bring you near to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the lord, and to stand before the congregation to minister unto them?
and he hath brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons of levi with thee: and seek ye the priesthood also?
for which cause both thou and all thy company are gathered together against the lord: and what is aaron, that ye murmur against him?
and moses sent to call dathan and abiram, the sons of eliab: which said, we will not come up: is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us?
moreover thou hast not brought us into a land that floweth with milk and honey, or given us inheritance of fields and vineyards: wilt thou put out the eyes of these men?
and they fell upon their faces, and said, o god, the god of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation?
whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the lord shall die: shall we be consumed with dying?
and why have ye brought up the congregation of the lord into this wilderness, that we and our cattle should die there?
and wherefore have ye made us to come up out of egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place?
and moses and aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, and he said unto them, hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock?
and the people spake against god, and against moses, wherefore have ye brought us up out of egypt to die in the wilderness?
and god came unto balaam, and said, what men are these with thee?
and the lord opened the mouth of the ass, and she said unto balaam, what have i done unto thee, that thou hast smitten me these three times?
and the ass said unto balaam, am not i thine ass, upon which thou hast ridden ever since i was thine unto this day?
was i ever wont to do so unto thee?
and the angel of the lord said unto him, wherefore hast thou smitten thine ass these three times?
and balak said unto balaam, did i not earnestly send unto thee to call thee?
wherefore camest thou not unto me?
am i not able indeed to promote thee to honour?
and balaam said unto balak, lo, i am come unto thee: have i now any power at all to say any thing?
how shall i curse, whom god hath not cursed?
or how shall i defy, whom the lord hath not defied?
who can count the dust of jacob, and the number of the fourth part of israel?
and balak said unto balaam, what hast thou done unto me?
and he answered and said, must i not take heed to speak that which the lord hath put in my mouth?
and balak said unto him, what hath the lord spoken?
and he took up his parable, and said, rise up, balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou son of zippor: god is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it?
or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good?
but balaam answered and said unto balak, told not i thee, saying, all that the lord speaketh, that i must do?
he couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion: who shall stir him up?
and balaam said unto balak, spake i not also to thy messengers which thou sentest unto me, saying, if balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, i cannot go beyond the commandment of the lord, to do either good or bad of mine own mind; but what the lord saith, that will i speak?
why should the name of our father be done away from among his family, because he hath no son?
and moses said unto them, have ye saved all the women alive?
and moses said unto the children of gad and to the children of reuben, shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here? and wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of israel from going over into the land which the lord hath given them?
)how can i myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
whither shall we go up?
for only og king of bashan remained of the remnant of giants; behold his bedstead was a bedstead of iron; is it not in rabbath of the children of ammon?
and i besought the lord at that time, saying, o lord god, thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty hand: for what god is there in heaven or in earth, that can do according to thy works, and according to thy might?
for what nation is there so great, who hath god so nigh unto them, as the lord our god is in all things that we call upon him for? and what nation is there so great, that hath statutes and judgments so righteous as all this law, which i set before you this day?
for ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the day that god created man upon the earth, and ask from the one side of heaven unto the other, whether there hath been any such thing as this great thing is, or hath been heard like it?
did ever people hear the voice of god speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and live?
or hath god assayed to go and take him a nation from the midst of another nation, by temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the lord your god did for you in egypt before your eyes?
now therefore why should we die?
for who is there of all flesh, that hath heard the voice of the living god speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived?
and when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, what mean the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which the lord our god hath commanded you?
if thou shalt say in thine heart, these nations are more than i; how can i dispossess them?
and now, israel, what doth the lord thy god require of thee, but to fear the lord thy god, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the lord thy god with all thy heart and with all thy soul, to keep the commandments of the lord, and his statutes, which i command thee this day for thy good?
are they not on the other side jordan, by the way where the sun goeth down, in the land of the canaanites, which dwell in the champaign over against gilgal, beside the plains of moreh?
when the lord thy god shall cut off the nations from before thee, whither thou goest to possess them, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in their land; take heed to thyself that thou be not snared by following them, after that they be destroyed from before thee; and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, how did these nations serve their gods?
and if thou say in thine heart, how shall we know the word which the lord hath not spoken?
and the officers shall speak unto the people, saying, what man is there that hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it?
and what man is he that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not yet eaten of it?
and what man is there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath not taken her?
and the officers shall speak further unto the people, and they shall say, what man is there that is fearful and fainthearted?
and the lord shall separate him unto evil out of all the tribes of israel, according to all the curses of the covenant that are written in this book of the law: so that the generation to come of your children that shall rise up after you, and the stranger that shall come from a far land, shall say, when they see the plagues of that land, and the sicknesses which the lord hath laid upon it;
and that the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning, that it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like the overthrow of sodom, and gomorrah, admah, and zeboim, which the lord overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath: even all nations shall say, wherefore hath the lord done thus unto this land?
what meaneth the heat of this great anger?
it is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it?
neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it?
then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and i will forsake them, and i will hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them; so that they will say in that day, are not these evils come upon us, because our god is not among us?
for i know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck: behold, while i am yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the lord; and how much more after my death?
do ye thus requite the lord, o foolish people and unwise?
is not he thy father that hath bought thee?
hath he not made thee, and established thee?
how should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their rock had sold them, and the lord had shut them up?
is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures?
and he shall say, where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted, which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink offerings?
have not i commanded thee?
then joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the children of israel, out of every tribe a man: and joshua said unto them, pass over before the ark of the lord your god into the midst of jordan, and take you up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, according unto the number of the tribes of the children of israel: that this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their fathers in time to come, saying, what mean ye by these stones?
and he spake unto the children of israel, saying, when your children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, what mean these stones?
and it came to pass, when joshua was by jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against him with his sword drawn in his hand: and joshua went unto him, and said unto him, art thou for us, or for our adversaries?
and joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto him, what saith my lord unto his servant?
and joshua said, alas, o lord god, wherefore hast thou at all brought this people over jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the amorites, to destroy us?
for the canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto thy great name?
and the lord said unto joshua, get thee up; wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?
and joshua said, why hast thou troubled us?
and the men of israel said unto the hivites, peradventure ye dwell among us; and how shall we make a league with you?
and joshua said unto them, who are ye?
and from whence come ye?
and joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying, wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, we are very far from you; when ye dwell among us?
is not this written in the book of jasher?
and it came to pass, as she came unto him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field: and she lighted off her ass; and caleb said unto her, what wouldest thou?
and the children of joseph spake unto joshua, saying, why hast thou given me but one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing i am a great people, forasmuch as the lord hath blessed me hitherto?
and joshua said unto the children of israel, how long are ye slack to go to possess the land, which the lord god of your fathers hath given you?
and they came unto the children of reuben, and to the children of gad, and to the half tribe of manasseh, unto the land of gilead, and they spake with them, saying, thus saith the whole congregation of the lord, what trespass is this that ye have committed against the god of israel, to turn away this day from following the lord, in that ye have builded you an altar, that ye might rebel this day against the lord?
is the iniquity of peor too little for us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, although there was a plague in the congregation of the lord, but that ye must turn away this day from following the lord?
did not achan the son of zerah commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of israel?
then the children of reuben and the children of gad and the half tribe of manasseh answered, and said unto the heads of the thousands of israel, the lord god of gods, the lord god of gods, he knoweth, and israel he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in transgression against the lord, (save us not this day,) that we have built us an altar to turn from following the lord, or if to offer thereon burnt offering or meat offering, or if to offer peace offerings thereon, let the lord himself require it; and if we have not rather done it for fear of this thing, saying, in time to come your children might speak unto our children, saying, what have ye to do with the lord god of israel?the book of judges now after the death of joshua it came to pass, that the children of israel asked the lord, saying, who shall go up for us against the canaanites first, to fight against them?
and it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field: and she lighted from off her ass; and caleb said unto her, what wilt thou?
and ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye shall throw down their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why have ye done this?
and she sent and called barak the son of abinoam out of kedeshnaphtali, and said unto him, hath not the lord god of israel commanded, saying, go and draw toward mount tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of the children of naphtali and of the children of zebulun?
and deborah said unto barak, up; for this is the day in which the lord hath delivered sisera into thine hand: is not the lord gone out before thee?
again he said unto her, stand in the door of the tent, and it shall be, when any man doth come and enquire of thee, and say, is there any man here?
they chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in israel?
why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks?
gilead abode beyond jordan: and why did dan remain in ships?
the mother of sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the lattice, why is his chariot so long in coming?
why tarry the wheels of his chariots?
her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to herself, have they not sped?
have they not divided the prey; to every man a damsel or two; to sisera a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needlework, of divers colours of needlework on both sides, meet for the necks of them that take the spoil?
and gideon said unto him, oh my lord, if the lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us?
and where be all his miracles which our fathers told us of, saying, did not the lord bring us up from egypt?
and the lord looked upon him, and said, go in this thy might, and thou shalt save israel from the hand of the midianites: have not i sent thee?
and he said unto him, oh my lord, wherewith shall i save israel?
and they said one to another, who hath done this thing?
and joash said unto all that stood against him, will ye plead for baal?
will ye save him?
and the men of ephraim said unto him, why hast thou served us thus, that thou calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight with the midianites?
and he said unto them, what have i done now in comparison of you?is not the gleaning of the grapes of ephraim better than the vintage of abiezer?
god hath delivered into your hands the princes of midian, oreb and zeeb: and what was i able to do in comparison of you?
and the princes of succoth said, are the hands of zebah and zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thine army?
and he came unto the men of succoth, and said, behold zebah and zalmunna, with whom ye did upbraid me, saying, are the hands of zebah and zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thy men that are weary?
then said he unto zebah and zalmunna, what manner of men were they whom ye slew at tabor?
and abimelech the son of jerubbaal went to shechem unto his mother's brethren, and communed with them, and with all the family of the house of his mother's father, saying, speak, i pray you, in the ears of all the men of shechem, whether is better for you, either that all the sons of jerubbaal, which are threescore and ten persons, reign over you, or that one reign over you?
but the olive tree said unto them, should i leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honour god and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?
but the fig tree said unto them, should i forsake my sweetness, and my good fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees?
and the vine said unto them, should i leave my wine, which cheereth god and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?
and gaal the son of ebed said, who is abimelech, and who is shechem, that we should serve him?
is not he the son of jerubbaal?
and zebul his officer?
serve the men of hamor the father of shechem: for why should we serve him?
then said zebul unto him, where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou saidst, who is abimelech, that we should serve him?
is not this the people that thou hast despised?
and the lord said unto the children of israel, did not i deliver you from the egyptians, and from the amorites, from the children of ammon, and from the philistines?
and the people and princes of gilead said one to another, what man is he that will begin to fight against the children of ammon?
and jephthah said unto the elders of gilead, did not ye hate me, and expel me out of my father's house?
and why are ye come unto me now when ye are in distress?
and jephthah said unto the elders of gilead, if ye bring me home again to fight against the children of ammon, and the lord deliver them before me, shall i be your head?
and jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of ammon, saying, what hast thou to do with me, that thou art come against me to fight in my land?
so now the lord god of israel hath dispossessed the amorites from before his people israel, and shouldest thou possess it? wilt not thou possess that which chemosh thy god giveth thee to possess?
and now art thou any thing better than balak the son of zippor, king of moab?
did he ever strive against israel, or did he ever fight against them, while israel dwelt in heshbon and her towns, and in aroer and her towns, and in all the cities that be along by the coasts of arnon, three hundred years?
why therefore did ye not recover them within that time?
and the men of ephraim gathered themselves together, and went northward, and said unto jephthah, wherefore passedst thou over to fight against the children of ammon, and didst not call us to go with thee?
and when i saw that ye delivered me not, i put my life in my hands, and passed over against the children of ammon, and the lord delivered them into my hand: wherefore then are ye come up unto me this day, to fight against me?
and the gileadites took the passages of jordan before the ephraimites: and it was so, that when those ephraimites which were escaped said, let me go over; that the men of gilead said unto him, art thou an ephraimite?
and manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man, and said unto him, art thou the man that spakest unto the woman?
how shall we order the child, and how shall we do unto him?
and manoah said unto the angel of the lord, what is thy name, that when thy sayings come to pass we may do thee honour?
and the angel of the lord said unto him, why askest thou thus after my name, seeing it is secret?
then his father and his mother said unto him, is there never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all my people, that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised philistines?
and it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto samson's wife, entice thy husband, that he may declare unto us the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father's house with fire: have ye called us to take that we have?
is it not so?
and he said unto her, behold, i have not told it my father nor my mother, and shall i tell it thee?
and the men of the city said unto him on the seventh day before the sun went down, what is sweeter than honey?
and what is stronger than a lion?
and her father said, i verily thought that thou hadst utterly hated her; therefore i gave her to thy companion: is not her younger sister fairer than she?
then the philistines said, who hath done this?
and the men of judah said, why are ye come up against us?
then three thousand men of judah went to the top of the rock etam, and said to samson, knowest thou not that the philistines are rulers over us?
what is this that thou hast done unto us?
and he was sore athirst, and called on the lord, and said, thou hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant: and now shall i die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised?
and she said unto him, how canst thou say, i love thee, when thine heart is not with me?
and micah said unto him, whence comest thou?
when they were by the house of micah, they knew the voice of the young man the levite: and they turned in thither, and said unto him, who brought thee hither?
and what makest thou in this place?
and what hast thou here?
and they came unto their brethren to zorah and eshtaol: and their brethren said unto them, what say ye?
and they said, arise, that we may go up against them: for we have seen the land, and, behold, it is very good: and are ye still?
then answered the five men that went to spy out the country of laish, and said unto their brethren, do ye know that there is in these houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image?
then said the priest unto them, what do ye?
and they said unto him, hold thy peace, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us a father and a priest: is it better for thee to be a priest unto the house of one man, or that thou be a priest unto a tribe and a family in israel?
and they turned their faces, and said unto micah, what aileth thee, that thou comest with such a company?
and he said, ye have taken away my gods which i made, and the priest, and ye are gone away: and what have i more?
and what is this that ye say unto me, what aileth thee?
and when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw a wayfaring man in the street of the city: and the old man said, whither goest thou?
and whence comest thou?
) then said the children of israel, tell us, how was this wickedness?
and the tribes of israel sent men through all the tribe of benjamin, saying, what wickedness is this that is done among you?
and the children of israel arose, and went up to the house of god, and asked counsel of god, and said, which of us shall go up first to the battle against the children of benjamin?
(and the children of israel went up and wept before the lord until even, and asked counsel of the lord, saying, shall i go up again to battle against the children of benjamin my brother?
and the children of israel enquired of the lord, (for the ark of the covenant of god was there in those days, and phinehas, the son of eleazar, the son of aaron, stood before it in those days,)
saying, shall i yet again go out to battle against the children of benjamin my brother, or shall i cease?
and the people came to the house of god, and abode there till even before god, and lifted up their voices, and wept sore; and said, o lord god of israel, why is this come to pass in israel, that there should be to day one tribe lacking in israel?
and the children of israel said, who is there among all the tribes of israel that came not up with the congregation unto the lord?
how shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing we have sworn by the lord that we will not give them of our daughters to wives?
and they said, what one is there of the tribes of israel that came not up to mizpeh to the lord?
then the elders of the congregation said, how shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing the women are destroyed out of benjamin?
and naomi said, turn again, my daughters: why will ye go with me?are there yet any more sons in my womb, that they may be your husbands?
if i should say, i have hope, if i should have an husband also to night, and should also bear sons; would ye tarry for them till they were grown?
would ye stay for them from having husbands?
and it came to pass, when they were come to bethlehem, that all the city was moved about them, and they said, is this naomi?
i went out full and the lord hath brought me home again empty: why then call ye me naomi, seeing the lord hath testified against me, and the almighty hath afflicted me?
then said boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers, whose damsel is this?
then said boaz unto ruth, hearest thou not, my daughter?
go not to glean in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by my maidens: let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and go thou after them: have i not charged the young men that they shall not touch thee?
then she fell on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and said unto him, why have i found grace in thine eyes, that thou shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing i am a stranger?
and her mother in law said unto her, where hast thou gleaned to day?
and where wroughtest thou? then naomi her mother in law said unto her, my daughter, shall i not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?
and now is not boaz of our kindred, with whose maidens thou wast?
and he said, who art thou?
and when she came to her mother in law, she said, who art thou, my daughter?
then said elkanah her husband to her, hannah, why weepest thou?and why eatest thou not?
and why is thy heart grieved?
am not i better to thee than ten sons?
and eli said unto her, how long wilt thou be drunken?
and he said unto them, why do ye such things?
if one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if a man sin against the lord, who shall intreat for him?
and there came a man of god unto eli, and said unto him, thus saith the lord, did i plainly appear unto the house of thy father, when they were in egypt in pharaoh's house?
and did i choose him out of all the tribes of israel to be my priest, to offer upon mine altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me?
and did i give unto the house of thy father all the offerings made by fire of the children of israel?
wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at mine offering, which i have commanded in my habitation; and honourest thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the offerings of israel my people?
and he said, what is the thing that the lord hath said unto thee?
and when the people were come into the camp, the elders of israel said, wherefore hath the lord smitten us to day before the philistines?
and when the philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said, what meaneth the noise of this great shout in the camp of the hebrews?
who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty gods?
and when eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, what meaneth the noise of this tumult?
and he said, what is there done, my son?
they sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the philistines unto them, and said, what shall we do with the ark of the god of israel?
and the philistines called for the priests and the diviners, saying, what shall we do to the ark of the lord?
then said they, what shall be the trespass offering which we shall return to him?
wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the egyptians and pharaoh hardened their hearts?
when he had wrought wonderfully among them, did they not let the people go, and they departed?
and the men of bethshemesh said, who is able to stand before this holy lord god?
and to whom shall he go up from us?
then said saul to his servant, but, behold, if we go, what shall we bring the man?
for the bread is spent in our vessels, and there is not a present to bring to the man of god: what have we?
and as they went up the hill to the city, they found young maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them, is the seer here?
and on whom is all the desire of israel?
is it not on thee, and on all thy father's house?
and saul answered and said, am not i a benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of israel?
and my family the least of all the families of the tribe of benjamin?
wherefore then speakest thou so to me?
then samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and kissed him, and said, is it not because the lord hath anointed thee to be captain over his inheritance?
when thou art departed from me to day, then thou shalt find two men by rachel's sepulchre in the border of benjamin at zelzah; and they will say unto thee, the asses which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, what shall i do for my son?
and it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that, behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said one to another, what is this that is come unto the son of kish?
is saul also among the prophets?
and one of the same place answered and said, but who is their father?
therefore it became a proverb, is saul also among the prophets?
and saul's uncle said unto him and to his servant, whither went ye?
and samuel said to all the people, see ye him whom the lord hath chosen, that there is none like him among all the people?
but the children of belial said, how shall this man save us?
and, behold, saul came after the herd out of the field; and saul said, what aileth the people that they weep?
and the people said unto samuel, who is he that said, shall saul reign over us?
behold, here i am: witness against me before the lord, and before his anointed: whose ox have i taken?
or whose ass have i taken?
or whom have i defrauded?
whom have i oppressed?
or of whose hand have i received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith?
is it not wheat harvest to day?
and samuel said, what hast thou done?
how much more, if haply the people had eaten freely to day of the spoil of their enemies which they found?
for had there not been now a much greater slaughter among the philistines?
and saul asked counsel of god, shall i go down after the philistines?
wilt thou deliver them into the hand of israel?
and the people said unto saul, shall jonathan die, who hath wrought this great salvation in israel?
and samuel said, what meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which i hear?
and samuel said, when thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made the head of the tribes of israel, and the lord anointed thee king over israel?
wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the lord, but didst fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the lord?
and samuel said, hath the lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the lord?
and the lord said unto samuel, how long wilt thou mourn for saul, seeing i have rejected him from reigning over israel?
and samuel said, how can i go?and the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, comest thou peaceably?
and samuel said unto jesse, are here all thy children?
and he stood and cried unto the armies of israel, and said unto them, why are ye come out to set your battle in array?
am not i a philistine, and ye servants to saul?
and the men of israel said, have ye seen this man that is come up?
and david spake to the men that stood by him, saying, what shall be done to the man that killeth this philistine, and taketh away the reproach from israel?
for who is this uncircumcised philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living god?
and eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men; and eliab's anger was kindled against david, and he said, why camest thou down hither?
and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness?
and david said, what have i now done?
is there not a cause?
and the philistine said unto david, am i a dog, that thou comest to me with staves?
and when saul saw david go forth against the philistine, he said unto abner, the captain of the host, abner, whose son is this youth?
and saul said to him, whose son art thou, thou young man?
and saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he said, they have ascribed unto david ten thousands, and to me they have ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?
and david said unto saul, who am i?
and what is my life, or my father's family in israel, that i should be son in law to the king?
and david said, seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king's son in law, seeing that i am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?
and jonathan spake good of david unto saul his father, and said unto him, let not the king sin against his servant, against david; because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works have been to thee-ward very good: for he did put his life in his hand, and slew the philistine, and the lord wrought a great salvation for all israel: thou sawest it, and didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt thou sin against innocent blood, to slay david without a cause?
and saul said unto michal, why hast thou deceived me so, and sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped?
and michal answered saul, he said unto me, let me go; why should i kill thee?
then went he also to ramah, and came to a great well that is in sechu: and he asked and said, where are samuel and david?
wherefore they say, is saul also among the prophets?
and david fled from naioth in ramah, and came and said before jonathan, what have i done?
what is mine iniquity?
and what is my sin before thy father, that he seeketh my life?
and he said unto him, god forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do nothing either great or small, but that he will shew it me: and why should my father hide this thing from me?
therefore thou shalt deal kindly with thy servant; for thou hast brought thy servant into a covenant of the lord with thee: notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why shouldest thou bring me to thy father?
and jonathan said, far be it from thee: for if i knew certainly that evil were determined by my father to come upon thee, then would not i tell it thee?
then said david to jonathan, who shall tell me?
or what if thy father answer thee roughly?
and it came to pass on the morrow, which was the second day of the month, that david's place was empty: and saul said unto jonathan his son, wherefore cometh not the son of jesse to meat, neither yesterday, nor to day?
then saul's anger was kindled against jonathan, and he said unto him, thou son of the perverse rebellious woman, do not i know that thou hast chosen the son of jesse to thine own confusion, and unto the confusion of thy mother's nakedness?
and jonathan answered saul his father, and said unto him, wherefore shall he be slain?
what hath he done?
and when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which jonathan had shot, jonathan cried after the lad, and said, is not the arrow beyond thee?
then came david to nob to ahimelech the priest: and ahimelech was afraid at the meeting of david, and said unto him, why art thou alone, and no man with thee?
now therefore what is under thine hand?
and david said unto ahimelech, and is there not here under thine hand spear or sword?
and the servants of achish said unto him, is not this david the king of the land?
did they not sing one to another of him in dances, saying, saul hath slain his thousands, and david his ten thousands?
then said achish unto his servants, lo, ye see the man is mad: wherefore then have ye brought him to me?
have i need of mad men, that ye have brought this fellow to play the mad man in my presence?
shall this fellow come into my house?
when saul heard that david was discovered, and the men that were with him, (now saul abode in gibeah under a tree in ramah, having his spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing about him;)
then saul said unto his servants that stood about him, hear now, ye benjamites; will the son of jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards, and make you all captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds; that all of you have conspired against me, and there is none that sheweth me that my son hath made a league with the son of jesse, and there is none of you that is sorry for me, or sheweth unto me that my son hath stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?
and saul said unto him, why have ye conspired against me, thou and the son of jesse, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword, and hast enquired of god for him, that he should rise against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?
then ahimelech answered the king, and said, and who is so faithful among all thy servants as david, which is the king's son in law, and goeth at thy bidding, and is honourable in thine house?
did i then begin to enquire of god for him?
therefore david enquired of the lord, saying, shall i go and smite these philistines?
and david's men said unto him, behold, we be afraid here in judah: how much more then if we come to keilah against the armies of the philistines?
will the men of keilah deliver me up into his hand?
will saul come down, as thy servant hath heard?
then said david, will the men of keilah deliver me and my men into the hand of saul?
then came up the ziphites to saul to gibeah, saying, doth not david hide himself with us in strong holds in the wood, in the hill of hachilah, which is on the south of jeshimon?
and david said to saul, wherefore hearest thou men's words, saying, behold, david seeketh thy hurt?
after whom is the king of israel come out?
after whom dost thou pursue?
and it came to pass, when david had made an end of speaking these words unto saul, that saul said, is this thy voice, my son david?
for if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away?
and nabal answered david's servants, and said, who is david?
and who is the son of jesse?
shall i then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that i have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom i know not whence they be?
and the ziphites came unto saul to gibeah, saying, doth not david hide himself in the hill of hachilah, which is before jeshimon?
then answered david and said to ahimelech the hittite, and to abishai the son of zeruiah, brother to joab, saying, who will go down with me to saul to the camp?
and david said to abishai, destroy him not: for who can stretch forth his hand against the lord's anointed, and be guiltless?
then david went over to the other side, and stood on the top of an hill afar off; a great space being between them: and david cried to the people, and to abner the son of ner, saying, answerest thou not, abner?
then abner answered and said, who art thou that criest to the king?
and david said to abner, art not thou a valiant man?
and who is like to thee in israel?
wherefore then hast thou not kept thy lord the king?
and saul knew david's voice, and said, is this thy voice, my son david?
and he said, wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his servant?
for what have i done?
or what evil is in mine hand?
and david said unto achish, if i have now found grace in thine eyes, let them give me a place in some town in the country, that i may dwell there: for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with thee?
and achish said, whither have ye made a road to day?
and the woman said unto him, behold, thou knowest what saul hath done, how he hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land: wherefore then layest thou a snare for my life, to cause me to die?
then said the woman, whom shall i bring up unto thee?
and when the woman saw samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and the woman spake to saul, saying, why hast thou deceived me?
and the king said unto her, be not afraid: for what sawest thou?
and he said unto her, what form is he of?
and samuel said to saul, why hast thou disquieted me, to bring me up?
then said samuel, wherefore then dost thou ask of me, seeing the lord is departed from thee, and is become thine enemy?
then said the princes of the philistines, what do these hebrews here?
and achish said unto the princes of the philistines, is not this david, the servant of saul the king of israel, which hath been with me these days, or these years, and i have found no fault in him since he fell unto me unto this day?
and the princes of the philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the philistines said unto him, make this fellow return, that he may go again to his place which thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest in the battle he be an adversary to us: for wherewith should he reconcile himself unto his master?
should it not be with the heads of these men?
is not this david, of whom they sang one to another in dances, saying, saul slew his thousands, and david his ten thousands?
and david said unto achish, but what have i done?
and what hast thou found in thy servant so long as i have been with thee unto this day, that i may not go fight against the enemies of my lord the king?
and david enquired at the lord, saying, shall i pursue after this troop?
shall i overtake them?
and david said unto him, to whom belongest thou?
and whence art thou?
and david said to him, canst thou bring me down to this company?
for who will hearken unto you in this matter?
and david said unto him, from whence comest thou?
and david said unto him, how went the matter?
and david said unto the young man that told him, how knowest thou that saul and jonathan his son be dead?
and he said unto me, who art thou?
and david said unto the young man that told him, whence art thou?
and david said unto him, how wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the lord's anointed? and it came to pass after this, that david enquired of the lord, saying, shall i go up into any of the cities of judah?
and david said, whither shall i go up?
then abner looked behind him, and said, art thou asahel?
and abner said again to asahel, turn thee aside from following me: wherefore should i smite thee to the ground?
how then should i hold up my face to joab thy brother?
then abner called to joab, and said, shall the sword devour for ever?
knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end?how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people return from following their brethren?
and saul had a concubine, whose name was rizpah, the daughter of aiah: and ishbosheth said to abner, wherefore hast thou gone in unto my father's concubine?
then was abner very wroth for the words of ishbosheth, and said, am i a dog's head, which against judah do shew kindness this day unto the house of saul thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of david, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this woman?
and abner sent messengers to david on his behalf, saying, whose is the land?
then joab came to the king, and said, what hast thou done?behold, abner came unto thee; why is it that thou hast sent him away, and he is quite gone?
and the king lamented over abner, and said, died abner as a fool dieth?
and the king said unto his servants, know ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen this day in israel?
and david answered rechab and baanah his brother, the sons of rimmon the beerothite, and said unto them, as the lord liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity, when one told me, saying, behold, saul is dead, thinking to have brought good tidings, i took hold of him, and slew him in ziklag, who thought that i would have given him a reward for his tidings: how much more, when wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his bed?
shall i not therefore now require his blood of your hand, and take you away from the earth?
and david enquired of the lord, saying, shall i go up to the philistines?
wilt thou deliver them into mine hand?
and david was afraid of the lord that day, and said, how shall the ark of the lord come to me?
and it came to pass that night, that the word of the lord came unto nathan, saying, go and tell my servant david, thus saith the lord, shalt thou build me an house for me to dwell in?
in all the places wherein i have walked with all the children of israel spake i a word with any of the tribes of israel, whom i commanded to feed my people israel, saying, why build ye not me an house of cedar?
then went king david in, and sat before the lord, and he said, who am i, o lord god?
and what is my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto?
and is this the manner of man, o lord god?
and what can david say more unto thee?
and what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like israel, whom god went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make him a name, and to do for you great things and terrible, for thy land, before thy people, which thou redeemedst to thee from egypt, from the nations and their gods?
and david said, is there yet any that is left of the house of saul, that i may shew him kindness for jonathan's sake?
and when they had called him unto david, the king said unto him, art thou ziba?
and the king said, is there not yet any of the house of saul, that i may shew the kindness of god unto him?
and the king said unto him, where is he?
and he bowed himself, and said, what is thy servant, that thou shouldest look upon such a dead dog as i am?
and the princes of the children of ammon said unto hanun their lord, thinkest thou that david doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto thee?
hath not david rather sent his servants unto thee, to search the city, and to spy it out, and to overthrow it?
and one said, is not this bathsheba, the daughter of eliam, the wife of uriah the hittite?
and when they had told david, saying, uriah went not down unto his house, david said unto uriah, camest thou not from thy journey?why then didst thou not go down unto thine house?
and uriah said unto david, the ark, and israel, and judah, abide in tents; and my lord joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open fields; shall i then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife?
then joab sent and told david all the things concerning the war; and charged the messenger, saying, when thou hast made an end of telling the matters of the war unto the king, and if so be that the king's wrath arise, and he say unto thee, wherefore approached ye so nigh unto the city when ye did fight?
knew ye not that they would shoot from the wall?
who smote abimelech the son of jerubbesheth?
did not a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon him from the wall, that he died in thebez?
why went ye nigh the wall?
wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the lord, to do evil in his sight?
and the servants of david feared to tell him that the child was dead: for they said, behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him, and he would not hearken unto our voice: how will he then vex himself, if we tell him that the child is dead?
but when david saw that his servants whispered, david perceived that the child was dead: therefore david said unto his servants, is the child dead?
then said his servants unto him, what thing is this that thou hast done?
and he said, while the child was yet alive, i fasted and wept: for i said, who can tell whether god will be gracious to me, that the child may live?
but now he is dead, wherefore should i fast?can i bring him back again? and he said unto him, why art thou, being the king's son, lean from day to day?
wilt thou not tell me?
and i, whither shall i cause my shame to go?
and absalom her brother said unto her, hath amnon thy brother been with thee?
and the king said unto him, why should he go with thee?
now absalom had commanded his servants, saying, mark ye now when amnon's heart is merry with wine, and when i say unto you, smite amnon; then kill him, fear not: have not i commanded you?
and the king said unto her, what aileth thee?
and the woman said, wherefore then hast thou thought such a thing against the people of god?
and the king said, is not the hand of joab with thee in all this?
then joab arose, and came to absalom unto his house, and said unto him, wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire?
and absalom answered joab, behold, i sent unto thee, saying, come hither, that i may send thee to the king, to say, wherefore am i come from geshur?
and absalom rose up early, and stood beside the way of the gate: and it was so, that when any man that had a controversy came to the king for judgment, then absalom called unto him, and said, of what city art thou?
then said the king to ittai the gittite, wherefore goest thou also with us?
whereas thou camest but yesterday, should i this day make thee go up and down with us?
the king said also unto zadok the priest, art not thou a seer?
and hast thou not there with thee zadok and abiathar the priests?
and the king said unto ziba, what meanest thou by these?
and the king said, and where is thy master's son?
then said abishai the son of zeruiah unto the king, why should this dead dog curse my lord the king?
and the king said, what have i to do with you, ye sons of zeruiah?
who shall then say, wherefore hast thou done so?
and david said to abishai, and to all his servants, behold, my son, which came forth of my bowels, seeketh my life: how much more now may this benjamite do it?
and absalom said to hushai, is this thy kindness to thy friend?why wentest thou not with thy friend?
and again, whom should i serve?
should i not serve in the presence of his son?
and when hushai was come to absalom, absalom spake unto him, saying, ahithophel hath spoken after this manner: shall we do after his saying?
and when absalom's servants came to the woman to the house, they said, where is ahimaaz and jonathan?
and joab said unto the man that told him, and, behold, thou sawest him, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground?
and joab said, wherefore wilt thou run, my son, seeing that thou hast no tidings ready?
and the king said, is the young man absalom safe?
and the king said unto cushi, is the young man absalom safe?
now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back? and king david sent to zadok and to abiathar the priests, saying, speak unto the elders of judah, saying, why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house?
ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: wherefore then are ye the last to bring back the king?
and say ye to amasa, art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh?
but abishai the son of zeruiah answered and said, shall not shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the lord's anointed?
and david said, what have i to do with you, ye sons of zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries unto me?
shall there any man be put to death this day in israel?
for do not i know that i am this day king over israel?
and it came to pass, when he was come to jerusalem to meet the king, that the king said unto him, wherefore wentest not thou with me, mephibosheth?
what right therefore have i yet to cry any more unto the king?
and the king said unto him, why speakest thou any more of thy matters?
and barzillai said unto the king, how long have i to live, that i should go up with the king unto jerusalem?
i am this day fourscore years old: and can i discern between good and evil?
can thy servant taste what i eat or what i drink?
can i hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women?
wherefore then should thy servant be yet a burden unto my lord the king?
thy servant will go a little way over jordan with the king: and why should the king recompense it me with such a reward?
and, behold, all the men of israel came to the king, and said unto the king, why have our brethren the men of judah stolen thee away, and have brought the king, and his household, and all david's men with him, over jordan?
and all the men of judah answered the men of israel, because the king is near of kin to us: wherefore then be ye angry for this matter?
have we eaten at all of the king's cost?
or hath he given us any gift?
and the men of israel answered the men of judah, and said, we have ten parts in the king, and we have also more right in david than ye: why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had in bringing back our king?
and joab said to amasa, art thou in health, my brother?
and when he was come near unto her, the woman said, art thou joab?
i am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in israel: thou seekest to destroy a city and a mother in israel: why wilt thou swallow up the inheritance of the lord?
)
wherefore david said unto the gibeonites, what shall i do for you?
and wherewith shall i make the atonement, that ye may bless the inheritance of the lord?
for who is god, save the lord?
and who is a rock, save our god?
and he said, be it far from me, o lord, that i should do this: is not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives?
was he not most honourable of three?
and joab said unto the king, now the lord thy god add unto the people, how many soever they be, an hundredfold, and that the eyes of my lord the king may see it: but why doth my lord the king delight in this thing?
so gad came to david, and told him, and said unto him, shall seven years of famine come unto thee in thy land?
or wilt thou flee three months before thine enemies, while they pursue thee?
or that there be three days' pestilence in thy land?
and david spake unto the lord when he saw the angel that smote the people, and said, lo, i have sinned, and i have done wickedly: but these sheep, what have they done?
and araunah said, wherefore is my lord the king come to his servant?
and his father had not displeased him at any time in saying, why hast thou done so?
wherefore nathan spake unto bathsheba the mother of solomon, saying, hast thou not heard that adonijah the son of haggith doth reign, and david our lord knoweth it not?
go and get thee in unto king david, and say unto him, didst not thou, my lord, o king, swear unto thine handmaid, saying, assuredly solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?why then doth adonijah reign?
and the king said, what wouldest thou?
and nathan said, my lord, o king, hast thou said, adonijah shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?
is this thing done by my lord the king, and thou hast not shewed it unto thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king after him?
and when joab heard the sound of the trumpet, he said, wherefore is this noise of the city being in an uproar?
and she said, comest thou peaceably?
and king solomon answered and said unto his mother, and why dost thou ask abishag the shunammite for adonijah?
and the king sent and called for shimei, and said unto him, did i not make thee to swear by the lord, and protested unto thee, saying, know for a certain, on the day thou goest out, and walkest abroad any whither, that thou shalt surely die?
why then hast thou not kept the oath of the lord, and the commandment that i have charged thee with?
give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that i may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a people?
but will god indeed dwell on the earth?
behold, the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that i have builded?
but if ye shall at all turn from following me, ye or your children, and will not keep my commandments and my statutes which i have set before you, but go and serve other gods, and worship them: then will i cut off israel out of the land which i have given them; and this house, which i have hallowed for my name, will i cast out of my sight; and israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all people: and at this house, which is high, every one that passeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss; and they shall say, why hath the lord done thus unto this land, and to this house?
and he said, what cities are these which thou hast given me, my brother?
then pharaoh said unto him, but what hast thou lacked with me, that, behold, thou seekest to go to thine own country?
and the rest of the acts of solomon, and all that he did, and his wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of solomon?
and king rehoboam consulted with the old men, that stood before solomon his father while he yet lived, and said, how do ye advise that i may answer this people?
but he forsook the counsel of the old men, which they had given him, and consulted with the young men that were grown up with him, and which stood before him: and he said unto them, what counsel give ye that we may answer this people, who have spoken to me, saying, make the yoke which thy father did put upon us lighter?
so when all israel saw that the king hearkened not unto them, the people answered the king, saying, what portion have we in david?
and their father said unto them, what way went he?
so they saddled him the ass: and he rode thereon, and went after the man of god, and found him sitting under an oak: and he said unto him, art thou the man of god that camest from judah?
and it was so, when ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she came in at the door, that he said, come in, thou wife of jeroboam; why feignest thou thyself to be another?
moreover the lord shall raise him up a king over israel, who shall cut off the house of jeroboam that day: but what?
now the rest of the acts of rehoboam, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
now the rest of the acts of abijam, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
the rest of all the acts of asa, and all his might, and all that he did, and the cities which he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
now the rest of the acts of nadab, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
now the rest of the acts of baasha, and what he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
now the rest of the acts of elah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
now the rest of the acts of zimri, and his treason that he wrought, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
now the rest of the acts of omri which he did, and his might that he shewed, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
and she said unto elijah, what have i to do with thee, o thou man of god?
art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son?
and he cried unto the lord, and said, o lord my god, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom i sojourn, by slaying her son?
and as obadiah was in the way, behold, elijah met him: and he knew him, and fell on his face, and said, art thou that my lord elijah?
and he said, what have i sinned, that thou wouldest deliver thy servant into the hand of ahab, to slay me?
was it not told my lord what i did when jezebel slew the prophets of the lord, how i hid an hundred men of the lord's prophets by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water?
and it came to pass, when ahab saw elijah, that ahab said unto him, art thou he that troubleth israel?
and elijah came unto all the people, and said, how long halt ye between two opinions?
and he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold, the word of the lord came to him, and he said unto him, what doest thou here, elijah?and, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, what doest thou here, elijah?and he said unto him, go back again: for what have i done to thee?
and, behold, there came a prophet unto ahab king of israel, saying, thus saith the lord, hast thou seen all this great multitude?
and ahab said, by whom?
then he said, who shall order the battle?
and he said, is he yet alive?
but jezebel his wife came to him, and said unto him, why is thy spirit so sad, that thou eatest no bread?
and jezebel his wife said unto him, dost thou now govern the kingdom of israel?
and thou shalt speak unto him, saying, thus saith the lord, hast thou killed, and also taken possession?
and ahab said to elijah, hast thou found me, o mine enemy?
and the word of the lord came to elijah the tishbite, saying, seest thou how ahab humbleth himself before me?
and the king of israel said unto his servants, know ye that ramoth in gilead is ours, and we be still, and take it not out of the hand of the king of syria?
and he said unto jehoshaphat, wilt thou go with me to battle to ramothgilead?
then the king of israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred men, and said unto them, shall i go against ramothgilead to battle, or shall i forbear?
and jehoshaphat said, is there not here a prophet of the lord besides, that we might enquire of him?
and the king said unto him, micaiah, shall we go against ramothgilead to battle, or shall we forbear?
and the king said unto him, how many times shall i adjure thee that thou tell me nothing but that which is true in the name of the lord?
and the king of israel said unto jehoshaphat, did i not tell thee that he would prophesy no good concerning me, but evil?
and the lord said, who shall persuade ahab, that he may go up and fall at ramothgilead?
and the lord said unto him, wherewith?
but zedekiah the son of chenaanah went near, and smote micaiah on the cheek, and said, which way went the spirit of the lord from me to speak unto thee?
now the rest of the acts of ahab, and all that he did, and the ivory house which he made, and all the cities that he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
now the rest of the acts of jehoshaphat, and his might that he shewed, and how he warred, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
but the angel of the lord said to elijah the tishbite, arise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of samaria, and say unto them, is it not because there is not a god in israel, that ye go to enquire of baalzebub the god of ekron?
and when the messengers turned back unto him, he said unto them, why are ye now turned back?
and they said unto him, there came a man up to meet us, and said unto us, go, turn again unto the king that sent you, and say unto him, thus saith the lord, is it not because there is not a god in israel, that thou sendest to enquire of baalzebub the god of ekron?
and he said unto them, what manner of man was he which came up to meet you, and told you these words?
and he said unto him, thus saith the lord, forasmuch as thou hast sent messengers to enquire of baalzebub the god of ekron, is it not because there is no god in israel to enquire of his word?
now the rest of the acts of ahaziah which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
and the sons of the prophets that were at bethel came forth to elisha, and said unto him, knowest thou that the lord will take away thy master from thy head to day?
and the sons of the prophets that were at jericho came to elisha, and said unto him, knowest thou that the lord will take away thy master from thy head to day?
he took up also the mantle of elijah that fell from him, and went back, and stood by the bank of jordan; and he took the mantle of elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said, where is the lord god of elijah?
and when they came again to him, (for he tarried at jericho,) he said unto them, did i not say unto you, go not?
and he went and sent to jehoshaphat the king of judah, saying, the king of moab hath rebelled against me: wilt thou go with me against moab to battle?
and he said, which way shall we go up?but jehoshaphat said, is there not here a prophet of the lord, that we may enquire of the lord by him?
and elisha said unto the king of israel, what have i to do with thee?
and elisha said unto her, what shall i do for thee?
tell me, what hast thou in the house?
and he said unto him, say now unto her, behold, thou hast been careful for us with all this care; what is to be done for thee?wouldest thou be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the host?
and he said, what then is to be done for her?
and he said, wherefore wilt thou go to him to day?
and it came to pass, when the man of god saw her afar off, that he said to gehazi his servant, behold, yonder is that shunammite: run now, i pray thee, to meet her, and say unto her, is it well with thee?
is it well with thy husband?
is it well with the child?
then she said, did i desire a son of my lord?
did i not say, do not deceive me?
and his servitor said, what, should i set this before an hundred men?
and it came to pass, when the king of israel had read the letter, that he rent his clothes, and said, am i god, to kill and to make alive, that this man doth send unto me to recover a man of his leprosy?
and it was so, when elisha the man of god had heard that the king of israel had rent his clothes, that he sent to the king, saying, wherefore hast thou rent thy clothes?
are not abana and pharpar, rivers of damascus, better than all the waters of israel?
may i not wash in them, and be clean?
and his servants came near, and spake unto him, and said, my father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it?
how much rather then, when he saith to thee, wash, and be clean?
and naaman said, shall there not then, i pray thee, be given to thy servant two mules' burden of earth?
and when naaman saw him running after him, he lighted down from the chariot to meet him, and said, is all well?
and elisha said unto him, whence comest thou, gehazi?
and he said unto him, went not mine heart with thee, when the man turned again from his chariot to meet thee?
is it a time to receive money, and to receive garments, and oliveyards, and vineyards, and sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and maidservants?
and the man of god said, where fell it?
therefore the heart of the king of syria was sore troubled for this thing; and he called his servants, and said unto them, will ye not shew me which of us is for the king of israel?
how shall we do?
and the king of israel said unto elisha, when he saw them, my father, shall i smite them?
shall i smite them?
and he answered, thou shalt not smite them: wouldest thou smite those whom thou hast taken captive with thy sword and with thy bow?
and he said, if the lord do not help thee, whence shall i help thee?
out of the barnfloor, or out of the winepress? and the king said unto her, what aileth thee?
but elisha sat in his house, and the elders sat with him; and the king sent a man from before him: but ere the messenger came to him, he said to the elders, see ye how this son of a murderer hath sent to take away mine head?
look, when the messenger cometh, shut the door, and hold him fast at the door: is not the sound of his master's feet behind him?
and while he yet talked with them, behold, the messenger came down unto him: and he said, behold, this evil is of the lord; what should i wait for the lord any longer?
then a lord on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of god, and said, behold, if the lord would make windows in heaven, might this thing be?
and there were four leprous men at the entering in of the gate: and they said one to another, why sit we here until we die?
and it came to pass as the man of god had spoken to the king, saying, two measures of barley for a shekel, and a measure of fine flour for a shekel, shall be to morrow about this time in the gate of samaria: and that lord answered the man of god, and said, now, behold, if the lord should make windows in heaven, might such a thing be?
and the king said unto hazael, take a present in thine hand, and go, meet the man of god, and enquire of the lord by him, saying, shall i recover of this disease?
so hazael went to meet him, and took a present with him, even of every good thing of damascus, forty camels'
burden, and came and stood before him, and said, thy son benhadad king of syria hath sent me to thee, saying, shall i recover of this disease?
and hazael said, why weepeth my lord?
and hazael said, but what, is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing?
so he departed from elisha, and came to his master; who said to him, what said elisha to thee?
and the rest of the acts of joram, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
and jehu said, unto which of all us?
then jehu came forth to the servants of his lord: and one said unto him, is all well?
wherefore came this mad fellow to thee?
and joram said, take an horseman, and send to meet them, and let him say, is it peace?
so there went one on horseback to meet him, and said, thus saith the king, is it peace?
and jehu said, what hast thou to do with peace?
then he sent out a second on horseback, which came to them, and said, thus saith the king, is it peace?
and jehu answered, what hast thou to do with peace?
and it came to pass, when joram saw jehu, that he said, is it peace, jehu?
and he answered, what peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many?
and as jehu entered in at the gate, she said, had zimri peace, who slew his master?
and he lifted up his face to the window, and said, who is on my side?
who? but they were exceedingly afraid, and said, behold, two kings stood not before him: how then shall we stand?
and it came to pass in the morning, that he went out, and stood, and said to all the people, ye be righteous: behold, i conspired against my master, and slew him: but who slew all these?
and as he was at the shearing house in the way, jehu met with the brethren of ahaziah king of judah, and said, who are ye?
and when he was departed thence, he lighted on jehonadab the son of rechab coming to meet him: and he saluted him, and said to him, is thine heart right, as my heart is with thy heart?
now the rest of the acts of jehu, and all that he did, and all his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
then king jehoash called for jehoiada the priest, and the other priests, and said unto them, why repair ye not the breaches of the house?
and the rest of the acts of joash, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
now the rest of the acts of jehoahaz, and all that he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
and the rest of the acts of joash, and all that he did, and his might wherewith he fought against amaziah king of judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
thou hast indeed smitten edom, and thine heart hath lifted thee up: glory of this, and tarry at home: for why shouldest thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and judah with thee?
now the rest of the acts of jehoash which he did, and his might, and how he fought with amaziah king of judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
and the rest of the acts of amaziah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
now the rest of the acts of jeroboam, and all that he did, and his might, how he warred, and how he recovered damascus, and hamath, which belonged to judah, for israel, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
and the rest of the acts of azariah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
and the rest of the acts of menahem, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of israel?
now the rest of the acts of jotham, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
now the rest of the acts of ahaz which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
and rabshakeh said unto them, speak ye now to hezekiah, thus saith the great king, the king of assyria, what confidence is this wherein thou trustest?
now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest against me?
but if ye say unto me, we trust in the lord our god: is not that he, whose high places and whose altars hezekiah hath taken away, and hath said to judah and jerusalem, ye shall worship before this altar in jerusalem?
how then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master's servants, and put thy trust on egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
am i now come up without the lord against this place to destroy it?
but rabshakeh said unto them, hath my master sent me to thy master, and to thee, to speak these words?
hath he not sent me to the men which sit on the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own piss with you?
hath any of the gods of the nations delivered at all his land out of the hand of the king of assyria?
where are the gods of hamath, and of arpad?
where are the gods of sepharvaim, hena, and ivah?
have they delivered samaria out of mine hand?
who are they among all the gods of the countries, that have delivered their country out of mine hand, that the lord should deliver jerusalem out of mine hand?
behold, thou hast heard what the kings of assyria have done to all lands, by destroying them utterly: and shalt thou be delivered?have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have destroyed; as gozan, and haran, and rezeph, and the children of eden which were in thelasar?
where is the king of hamath, and the king of arpad, and the king of the city of sepharvaim, of hena, and ivah?
whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed?
and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high?
hast thou not heard long ago how i have done it, and of ancient times that i have formed it?
and hezekiah said unto isaiah, what shall be the sign that the lord will heal me, and that i shall go up into the house of the lord the third day?
and isaiah said, this sign shalt thou have of the lord, that the lord will do the thing that he hath spoken: shall the shadow go forward ten degrees, or go back ten degrees?
then came isaiah the prophet unto king hezekiah, and said unto him, what said these men?
and from whence came they unto thee?
and he said, what have they seen in thine house?
and he said, is it not good, if peace and truth be in my days?
and the rest of the acts of hezekiah, and all his might, and how he made a pool, and a conduit, and brought water into the city, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
now the rest of the acts of manasseh, and all that he did, and his sin that he sinned, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
now the rest of the acts of amon which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
then he said, what title is that that i see?
now the rest of the acts of josiah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
now the rest of the acts of jehoiakim, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of judah?
and said, my god forbid it me, that i should do this thing: shall i drink the blood of these men that have put their lives in jeopardy?
and david was afraid of god that day, saying, how shall i bring the ark of god home to me?
and david enquired of god, saying, shall i go up against the philistines?
and wilt thou deliver them into mine hand?
wheresoever i have walked with all israel, spake i a word to any of the judges of israel, whom i commanded to feed my people, saying, why have ye not built me an house of cedars?
and david the king came and sat before the lord, and said, who am i, o lord god, and what is mine house, that thou hast brought me hitherto?
what can david speak more to thee for the honour of thy servant?
and what one nation in the earth is like thy people israel, whom god went to redeem to be his own people, to make thee a name of greatness and terribleness, by driving out nations from before thy people whom thou hast redeemed out of egypt?
but the princes of the children of ammon said to hanun, thinkest thou that david doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto thee?
are not his servants come unto thee for to search, and to overthrow, and to spy out the land?
and joab answered, the lord make his people an hundred times so many more as they be: but, my lord the king, are they not all my lord's servants?
why then doth my lord require this thing?
why will he be a cause of trespass to israel?
and david said unto god, is it not i that commanded the people to be numbered?
even i it is that have sinned and done evil indeed; but as for these sheep, what have they done?
david also commanded all the princes of israel to help solomon his son, saying, is not the lord your god with you?
and hath he not given you rest on every side?
and who then is willing to consecrate his service this day unto the lord?
but who am i, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort?
give me now wisdom and knowledge, that i may go out and come in before this people: for who can judge this thy people, that is so great?
but who is able to build him an house, seeing the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain him?
who am i then, that i should build him an house, save only to burn sacrifice before him?
but will god in very deed dwell with men on the earth?
and this house, which is high, shall be an astonishment to every one that passeth by it; so that he shall say, why hath the lord done thus unto this land, and unto this house?
now the rest of the acts of solomon, first and last, are they not written in the book of nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of ahijah the shilonite, and in the visions of iddo the seer against jeroboam the son of nebat?
and king rehoboam took counsel with the old men that had stood before solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, what counsel give ye me to return answer to this people?
and he said unto them, what advice give ye that we may return answer to this people, which have spoken to me, saying, ease somewhat the yoke that thy father did put upon us?
and when all israel saw that the king would not hearken unto them, the people answered the king, saying, what portion have we in david?
now the acts of rehoboam, first and last, are they not written in the book of shemaiah the prophet, and of iddo the seer concerning genealogies?
and abijah stood up upon mount zemaraim, which is in mount ephraim, and said, hear me, thou jeroboam, and all israel; ought ye not to know that the lord god of israel gave the kingdom over israel to david for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt?
have ye not cast out the priests of the lord, the sons of aaron, and the levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the nations of other lands?
were not the ethiopians and the lubims a huge host, with very many chariots and horsemen?
and ahab king of israel said unto jehoshaphat king of judah, wilt thou go with me to ramothgilead?
therefore the king of israel gathered together of prophets four hundred men, and said unto them, shall we go to ramothgilead to battle, or shall i forbear?
but jehoshaphat said, is there not here a prophet of the lord besides, that we might enquire of him?
and when he was come to the king, the king said unto him, micaiah, shall we go to ramothgilead to battle, or shall i forbear?
and the king said to him, how many times shall i adjure thee that thou say nothing but the truth to me in the name of the lord?
and the king of israel said to jehoshaphat, did i not tell thee that he would not prophesy good unto me, but evil?
and the lord said, who shall entice ahab king of israel, that he may go up and fall at ramothgilead?
and the lord said unto him, wherewith?
then zedekiah the son of chenaanah came near, and smote micaiah upon the cheek, and said, which way went the spirit of the lord from me to speak unto thee?
and jehu the son of hanani the seer went out to meet him, and said to king jehoshaphat, shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the lord?
and jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of judah and jerusalem, in the house of the lord, before the new court, and said, o lord god of our fathers, art not thou god in heaven?
and rulest not thou over all the kingdoms of the heathen?
and in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee?
art not thou our god, who didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before thy people israel, and gavest it to the seed of abraham thy friend for ever?
o our god, wilt thou not judge them?
and the king called for jehoiada the chief, and said unto him, why hast thou not required of the levites to bring in out of judah and out of jerusalem the collection, according to the commandment of moses the servant of the lord, and of the congregation of israel, for the tabernacle of witness?
and the spirit of god came upon zechariah the son of jehoiada the priest, which stood above the people, and said unto them, thus saith god, why transgress ye the commandments of the lord, that ye cannot prosper?
and amaziah said to the man of god, but what shall we do for the hundred talents which i have given to the army of israel?
wherefore the anger of the lord was kindled against amaziah, and he sent unto him a prophet, which said unto him, why hast thou sought after the gods of the people, which could not deliver their own people out of thine hand?
and it came to pass, as he talked with him, that the king said unto him, art thou made of the king's counsel?forbear; why shouldest thou be smitten?
thou sayest, lo, thou hast smitten the edomites; and thine heart lifteth thee up to boast: abide now at home; why shouldest thou meddle to thine hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and judah with thee?
now the rest of the acts of amaziah, first and last, behold, are they not written in the book of the kings of judah and israel?
and now ye purpose to keep under the children of judah and jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen unto you: but are there not with you, even with you, sins against the lord your god?
so there was gathered much people together, who stopped all the fountains, and the brook that ran through the midst of the land, saying, why should the kings of assyria come, and find much water?
after this did sennacherib king of assyria send his servants to jerusalem, (but he himself laid siege against lachish, and all his power with him,) unto hezekiah king of judah, and unto all judah that were at jerusalem, saying, thus saith sennacherib king of assyria, whereon do ye trust, that ye abide in the siege in jerusalem?doth not hezekiah persuade you to give over yourselves to die by famine and by thirst, saying, the lord our god shall deliver us out of the hand of the king of assyria?
hath not the same hezekiah taken away his high places and his altars, and commanded judah and jerusalem, saying, ye shall worship before one altar, and burn incense upon it?
know ye not what i and my fathers have done unto all the people of other lands?
were the gods of the nations of those lands any ways able to deliver their lands out of mine hand?
who was there among all the gods of those nations that my fathers utterly destroyed, that could deliver his people out of mine hand, that your god should be able to deliver you out of mine hand?
now therefore let not hezekiah deceive you, nor persuade you on this manner, neither yet believe him: for no god of any nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of mine hand, and out of the hand of my fathers: how much less shall your god deliver you out of mine hand?
but he sent ambassadors to him, saying, what have i to do with thee, thou king of judah?
who is there among you of all his people?
who is there among you of all his people?
take heed now that ye fail not to do this: why should damage grow to the hurt of the kings?
at the same time came to them tatnai, governor on this side the river, and shetharboznai and their companions, and said thus unto them, who hath commanded you to build this house, and to make up this wall?
then said we unto them after this manner, what are the names of the men that make this building?
then asked we those elders, and said unto them thus, who commanded you to build this house, and to make up these walls?
whatsoever is commanded by the god of heaven, let it be diligently done for the house of the god of heaven: for why should there be wrath against the realm of the king and his sons?
and now, o our god, what shall we say after this?
and after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing that thou our god hast punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and hast given us such deliverance as this; should we again break thy commandments, and join in affinity with the people of these abominations?
wouldest not thou be angry with us till thou hadst consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping?
wherefore the king said unto me, why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick?then i was very sore afraid, and said unto the king, let the king live for ever: why should not my countenance be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers' sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates thereof are consumed with fire?
then the king said unto me, for what dost thou make request?
and the king said unto me, (the queen also sitting by him,) for how long shall thy journey be?
and when wilt thou return?
but when sanballat the horonite, and tobiah the servant, the ammonite, and geshem the arabian, heard it, they laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and said, what is this thing that ye do?
will ye rebel against the king?
and he spake before his brethren and the army of samaria, and said, what do these feeble jews?
will they fortify themselves?
will they sacrifice?
will they make an end in a day?
will they revive the stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burned?
and i said unto them, we after our ability have redeemed our brethren the jews, which were sold unto the heathen; and will ye even sell your brethren?
or shall they be sold unto us?
also i said, it is not good that ye do: ought ye not to walk in the fear of our god because of the reproach of the heathen our enemies?
and i sent messengers unto them, saying, i am doing a great work, so that i cannot come down: why should the work cease, whilst i leave it, and come down to you?
and i said, should such a man as i flee?
and who is there, that, being as i am, would go into the temple to save his life?
then contended i with the rulers, and said, why is the house of god forsaken?
then i contended with the nobles of judah, and said unto them, what evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day?did not your fathers thus, and did not our god bring all this evil upon us, and upon this city?
then i testified against them, and said unto them, why lodge ye about the wall?
did not solomon king of israel sin by these things?
shall we then hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to transgress against our god in marrying strange wives?
then the king said to the wise men, which knew the times, (for so was the king's manner toward all that knew law and judgment: and the next unto him was carshena, shethar, admatha, tarshish, meres, marsena, and memucan, the seven princes of persia and media, which saw the king's face, and which sat the first in the kingdom;) what shall we do unto the queen vashti according to law, because she hath not performed the commandment of the king ahasuerus by the chamberlains?
then the king's servants, which were in the king's gate, said unto mordecai, why transgressest thou the king's commandment?
for if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time, then shall there enlargement and deliverance arise to the jews from another place; but thou and thy father's house shall be destroyed: and who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?
then said the king unto her, what wilt thou, queen esther?
and what is thy request?
and the king said unto esther at the banquet of wine, what is thy petition?
and it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request?
and the king said, what honour and dignity hath been done to mordecai for this?
and the king said, who is in the court?
and the king said unto him, what shall be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour?
now haman thought in his heart, to whom would the king delight to do honour more than to myself?
and the king said again unto esther on the second day at the banquet of wine, what is thy petition, queen esther?
and it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request?
then the king ahasuerus answered and said unto esther the queen, who is he, and where is he, that durst presume in his heart to do so?
then said the king, will he force the queen also before me in the house?
so esther arose, and stood before the king, and said, if it please the king, and if i have favour in his sight, and the thing seem right before the king, and i be pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to reverse the letters devised by haman the son of hammedatha the agagite, which he wrote to destroy the jews which are in all the king's provinces: for how can i endure to see the evil that shall come unto my people?or how can i endure to see the destruction of my kindred?
and the king said unto esther the queen, the jews have slain and destroyed five hundred men in shushan the palace, and the ten sons of haman; what have they done in the rest of the king's provinces?
now what is thy petition?
and it shall be granted thee: or what is thy request further?
and all the acts of his power and of his might, and the declaration of the greatness of mordecai, whereunto the king advanced him, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of media and persia?
and the lord said unto satan, whence comest thou?
and the lord said unto satan, hast thou considered my servant job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth god, and escheweth evil?
then satan answered the lord, and said, doth job fear god for nought?
hast not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath on every side?
and the lord said unto satan, from whence comest thou?
and the lord said unto satan, hast thou considered my servant job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth god, and escheweth evil?
then said his wife unto him, dost thou still retain thine integrity?
what?
shall we receive good at the hand of god, and shall we not receive evil?
why died i not from the womb?
why did i not give up the ghost when i came out of the belly?
why did the knees prevent me?
or why the breasts that i should suck?
wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter in soul; which long for death, but it cometh not; and dig for it more than for hid treasures; which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad, when they can find the grave?
why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom god hath hedged in?
then eliphaz the temanite answered and said, if we assay to commune with thee, wilt thou be grieved?
but who can withhold himself from speaking?
is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope, and the uprightness of thy ways?
remember, i pray thee, who ever perished, being innocent?
or where were the righteous cut off?
then a spirit passed before my face; the hair of my flesh stood up: it stood still, but i could not discern the form thereof: an image was before mine eyes, there was silence, and i heard a voice, saying, shall mortal man be more just than god?
shall a man be more pure than his maker?
behold, he put no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged with folly: how much less in them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the moth?
doth not their excellency which is in them go away?
call now, if there be any that will answer thee; and to which of the saints wilt thou turn?
doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass?
or loweth the ox over his fodder?
can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt?
or is there any taste in the white of an egg?
what is my strength, that i should hope?
and what is mine end, that i should prolong my life?
is my strength the strength of stones?
or is my flesh of brass?
is not my help in me?
and is wisdom driven quite from me?
did i say, bring unto me?
or, give a reward for me of your substance?
or, deliver me from the enemy's hand?
or, redeem me from the hand of the mighty?
but what doth your arguing reprove?do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is desperate, which are as wind?
is there iniquity in my tongue?
cannot my taste discern perverse things?
is there not an appointed time to man upon earth?
are not his days also like the days of an hireling?
when i lie down, i say, when shall i arise, and the night be gone?
am i a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a watch over me?
what is man, that thou shouldest magnify him?
and that thou shouldest set thine heart upon him?
and that thou shouldest visit him every morning, and try him every moment?
how long wilt thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till i swallow down my spittle?
i have sinned; what shall i do unto thee, o thou preserver of men?
why hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so that i am a burden to myself?
and why dost thou not pardon my transgression, and take away my iniquity?
then answered bildad the shuhite, and said, how long wilt thou speak these things?
and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind?
doth god pervert judgment?
or doth the almighty pervert justice?
for enquire, i pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thyself to the search of their fathers: (for we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow:) shall not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their heart?
can the rush grow up without mire?
can the flag grow without water?
then job answered and said, i know it is so of a truth: but how should man be just with god?
he is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who hath hardened himself against him, and hath prospered?
behold, he taketh away, who can hinder him?
who will say unto him, what doest thou?
how much less shall i answer him, and choose out my words to reason with him?
if i speak of strength, lo, he is strong: and if of judgment, who shall set me a time to plead?
the earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covereth the faces of the judges thereof; if not, where, and who is he?
if i be wicked, why then labour i in vain?
is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress, that thou shouldest despise the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel of the wicked?
hast thou eyes of flesh?
or seest thou as man seeth?
are thy days as the days of man?
are thy years as man's days, that thou enquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin?
remember, i beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay; and wilt thou bring me into dust again?
hast thou not poured me out as milk, and curdled me like cheese?
wherefore then hast thou brought me forth out of the womb?
are not my days few?
then answered zophar the naamathite, and said, should not the multitude of words be answered?
and should a man full of talk be justified?
should thy lies make men hold their peace?
and when thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed?
canst thou by searching find out god?
canst thou find out the almighty unto perfection?
it is as high as heaven; what canst thou do?
deeper than hell; what canst thou know?
if he cut off, and shut up, or gather together, then who can hinder him?
for he knoweth vain men: he seeth wickedness also; will he not then consider it?
but i have understanding as well as you; i am not inferior to you: yea, who knoweth not such things as these?
who knoweth not in all these that the hand of the lord hath wrought this?
doth not the ear try words?
and the mouth taste his meat?
will ye speak wickedly for god?
and talk deceitfully for him?will ye accept his person?
will ye contend for god?
is it good that he should search you out?
or as one man mocketh another, do ye so mock him?
shall not his excellency make you afraid?
and his dread fall upon you?
wherefore do i take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in mine hand?
who is he that will plead with me?
how many are mine iniquities and sins?
wherefore hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemy?wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro?
and wilt thou pursue the dry stubble?
and doth thou open thine eyes upon such an one, and bringest me into judgment with thee?
who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
but man dieth, and wasteth away: yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where is he?
if a man die, shall he live again? for now thou numberest my steps: dost thou not watch over my sin?
then answered eliphaz the temanite, and said, should a wise man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the east wind? should he reason with unprofitable talk?
or with speeches wherewith he can do no good?
art thou the first man that was born?
or wast thou made before the hills?
hast thou heard the secret of god?
and dost thou restrain wisdom to thyself?
what knowest thou, that we know not?what understandest thou, which is not in us? are the consolations of god small with thee?
is there any secret thing with thee?
why doth thine heart carry thee away?
and what do thy eyes wink at, that thou turnest thy spirit against god, and lettest such words go out of thy mouth?
what is man, that he should be clean?
and he which is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?
how much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinketh iniquity like water?
he wandereth abroad for bread, saying, where is it?
shall vain words have an end?
or what emboldeneth thee that thou answerest?
though i speak, my grief is not asswaged: and though i forbear, what am i eased?
are there not mockers with me?
and doth not mine eye continue in their provocation?
lay down now, put me in a surety with thee; who is he that will strike hands with me?
and where is now my hope?
as for my hope, who shall see it?
then answered bildad the shuhite, and said, how long will it be ere ye make an end of words?
wherefore are we counted as beasts, and reputed vile in your sight?
he teareth himself in his anger: shall the earth be forsaken for thee?
and shall the rock be removed out of his place?
then job answered and said, how long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words?
why do ye persecute me as god, and are not satisfied with my flesh?
but ye should say, why persecute we him, seeing the root of the matter is found in me?
knowest thou not this of old, since man was placed upon earth, that the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment?
though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds; yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung: they which have seen him shall say, where is he?
as for me, is my complaint to man?
and if it were so, why should not my spirit be troubled?
wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in power?
what is the almighty, that we should serve him?
and what profit should we have, if we pray unto him?
for what pleasure hath he in his house after him, when the number of his months is cut off in the midst?
shall any teach god knowledge?
for ye say, where is the house of the prince?
and where are the dwelling places of the wicked?
have ye not asked them that go by the way?
and do ye not know their tokens, that the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction?
who shall declare his way to his face?
and who shall repay him what he hath done?
how then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers there remaineth falsehood?
then eliphaz the temanite answered and said, can a man be profitable unto god, as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself?
is it any pleasure to the almighty, that thou art righteous?
or is it gain to him, that thou makest thy ways perfect?
will he reprove thee for fear of thee?
will he enter with thee into judgment?
is not thy wickedness great?
and thine iniquities infinite?
is not god in the height of heaven?
and thou sayest, how doth god know?can he judge through the dark cloud? hast thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden?which were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflown with a flood: which said unto god, depart from us: and what can the almighty do for them?
will he plead against me with his great power?
but he is in one mind, and who can turn him?
why, seeing times are not hidden from the almighty, do they that know him not see his days?
and if it be not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my speech nothing worth?
is there any number of his armies?
and upon whom doth not his light arise?
how then can man be justified with god?
or how can he be clean that is born of a woman?
how much less man, that is a worm?
and the son of man, which is a worm?
but job answered and said, how hast thou helped him that is without power?
how savest thou the arm that hath no strength?how hast thou counselled him that hath no wisdom?
and how hast thou plentifully declared the thing as it is?
to whom hast thou uttered words?
and whose spirit came from thee?
lo, these are parts of his ways: but how little a portion is heard of him?
but the thunder of his power who can understand?
for what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained, when god taketh away his soul?
will god hear his cry when trouble cometh upon him?
will he delight himself in the almighty?
will he always call upon god?
behold, all ye yourselves have seen it; why then are ye thus altogether vain?
but where shall wisdom be found?
and where is the place of understanding?
whence then cometh wisdom?
and where is the place of understanding?
yea, whereto might the strength of their hands profit me, in whom old age was perished?
did not i weep for him that was in trouble?
was not my soul grieved for the poor?
i made a covenant with mine eyes; why then should i think upon a maid?
for what portion of god is there from above?
and what inheritance of the almighty from on high?
is not destruction to the wicked?
and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity? doth not he see my ways, and count all my steps?
if i did despise the cause of my manservant or of my maidservant, when they contended with me; what then shall i do when god riseth up?
and when he visiteth, what shall i answer him?did not he that made me in the womb make him?
and did not one fashion us in the womb?
if i covered my transgressions as adam, by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom: did i fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of families terrify me, that i kept silence, and went not out of the door?
why dost thou strive against him?
should i lie against my right?
what man is like job, who drinketh up scorning like water?
who hath given him a charge over the earth?
or who hath disposed the whole world?
shall even he that hateth right govern?
and wilt thou condemn him that is most just?
is it fit to say to a king, thou art wicked?
and to princes, ye are ungodly?
how much less to him that accepteth not the persons of princes, nor regardeth the rich more than the poor?
when he giveth quietness, who then can make trouble?
and when he hideth his face, who then can behold him?
should it be according to thy mind?
elihu spake moreover, and said, thinkest thou this to be right, that thou saidst, my righteousness is more than god's? for thou saidst, what advantage will it be unto thee?
and, what profit shall i have, if i be cleansed from my sin?
if thou sinnest, what doest thou against him?
or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto him?
if thou be righteous, what givest thou him?
or what receiveth he of thine hand?
but none saith, where is god my maker, who giveth songs in the night; who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and maketh us wiser than the fowls of heaven?
will he esteem thy riches?
behold, god exalteth by his power: who teacheth like him? who hath enjoined him his way?
or who can say, thou hast wrought iniquity?
also can any understand the spreadings of the clouds, or the noise of his tabernacle?
dost thou know when god disposed them, and caused the light of his cloud to shine?
dost thou know the balancings of the clouds, the wondrous works of him which is perfect in knowledge?how thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the south wind?
hast thou with him spread out the sky, which is strong, and as a molten looking glass?
shall it be told him that i speak?
then the lord answered job out of the whirlwind, and said,
who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?
where wast thou when i laid the foundations of the earth?
who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest?
or who hath stretched the line upon it?
whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened?
or who laid the corner stone thereof; when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of god shouted for joy?or who shut up the sea with doors, when it brake forth, as if it had issued out of the womb?
when i made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swaddlingband for it, and brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors, and said, hitherto shalt thou come, but no further: and here shall thy proud waves be stayed?
hast thou commanded the morning since thy days; and caused the dayspring to know his place; that it might take hold of the ends of the earth, that the wicked might be shaken out of it?
hast thou entered into the springs of the sea?
or hast thou walked in the search of the depth?
have the gates of death been opened unto thee?
or hast thou seen the doors of the shadow of death?hast thou perceived the breadth of the earth?
where is the way where light dwelleth?
and as for darkness, where is the place thereof, that thou shouldest take it to the bound thereof, and that thou shouldest know the paths to the house thereof?
knowest thou it, because thou wast then born?
or because the number of thy days is great?
hast thou entered into the treasures of the snow?
or hast thou seen the treasures of the hail, which i have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war?
by what way is the light parted, which scattereth the east wind upon the earth?
who hath divided a watercourse for the overflowing of waters, or a way for the lightning of thunder; to cause it to rain on the earth, where no man is; on the wilderness, wherein there is no man; to satisfy the desolate and waste ground; and to cause the bud of the tender herb to spring forth?
hath the rain a father?
or who hath begotten the drops of dew?
out of whose womb came the ice?
and the hoary frost of heaven, who hath gendered it?
canst thou bind the sweet influences of pleiades, or loose the bands of orion?
canst thou bring forth mazzaroth in his season?or canst thou guide arcturus with his sons? knowest thou the ordinances of heaven?
canst thou set the dominion thereof in the earth?
canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may cover thee?
canst thou send lightnings, that they may go and say unto thee, here we are?
who hath put wisdom in the inward parts?
or who hath given understanding to the heart?
who can number the clouds in wisdom?
or who can stay the bottles of heaven, when the dust groweth into hardness, and the clods cleave fast together?
wilt thou hunt the prey for the lion?
or fill the appetite of the young lions, when they couch in their dens, and abide in the covert to lie in wait?
who provideth for the raven his food?
knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth?
or canst thou mark when the hinds do calve?
canst thou number the months that they fulfil?
or knowest thou the time when they bring forth?
who hath sent out the wild ass free?
or who hath loosed the bands of the wild ass?
will the unicorn be willing to serve thee, or abide by thy crib?canst thou bind the unicorn with his band in the furrow?
or will he harrow the valleys after thee?
wilt thou trust him, because his strength is great?
or wilt thou leave thy labour to him? wilt thou believe him, that he will bring home thy seed, and gather it into thy barn?
gavest thou the goodly wings unto the peacocks?or wings and feathers unto the ostrich? hast thou given the horse strength?
hast thou clothed his neck with thunder?
canst thou make him afraid as a grasshopper? doth the hawk fly by thy wisdom, and stretch her wings toward the south?
doth the eagle mount up at thy command, and make her nest on high?
moreover the lord answered job, and said, shall he that contendeth with the almighty instruct him?
then job answered the lord, and said, behold, i am vile; what shall i answer thee?
wilt thou also disannul my judgment?
wilt thou condemn me, that thou mayest be righteous?
hast thou an arm like god?
or canst thou thunder with a voice like him?
canst thou draw out leviathan with an hook?
or his tongue with a cord which thou lettest down?
canst thou put an hook into his nose?
or bore his jaw through with a thorn?
will he make many supplications unto thee?
will he speak soft words unto thee? will he make a covenant with thee?
wilt thou take him for a servant for ever?
wilt thou play with him as with a bird?
or wilt thou bind him for thy maidens?
shall the companions make a banquet of him?
shall they part him among the merchants?
canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons?
or his head with fish spears?
behold, the hope of him is in vain: shall not one be cast down even at the sight of him?
none is so fierce that dare stir him up: who then is able to stand before me?
who hath prevented me, that i should repay him?
who can discover the face of his garment?
or who can come to him with his double bridle?
who can open the doors of his face? who is he that hideth counsel without knowledge?
why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?
o ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame?
how long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing?
there be many that say, who will shew us any good?
my soul is also sore vexed: but thou, o lord, how long?
for in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall give thee thanks?
when i consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained;what is man, that thou art mindful of him?
and the son of man, that thou visitest him?
why standest thou afar off, o lord?
why hidest thou thyself in times of trouble?
wherefore doth the wicked contemn god?
in the lord put i my trust: how say ye to my soul, flee as a bird to your mountain?
if the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?
the lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaketh proud things:who have said, with our tongue will we prevail; our lips are our own: who is lord over us?
how long wilt thou forget me, o lord?
for ever?
how long wilt thou hide thy face from me?
how long shall i take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily?
how long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?
have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge?
lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle?
who shall dwell in thy holy hill?
for who is god save the lord?
or who is a rock save our god?
who can understand his errors?
my god, my god, why hast thou forsaken me?
why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring?
who shall ascend into the hill of the lord?
or who shall stand in his holy place?
who is this king of glory?
who is this king of glory?
what man is he that feareth the lord?
the lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall i fear?
the lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall i be afraid?
what profit is there in my blood, when i go down to the pit?shall the dust praise thee?
shall it declare thy truth?
what man is he that desireth life, and loveth many days, that he may see good?
all my bones shall say, lord, who is like unto thee, which deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him, yea, the poor and the needy from him that spoileth him?
lord, how long wilt thou look on?
and now, lord, what wait i for?
mine enemies speak evil of me, when shall he die, and his name perish?
my soul thirsteth for god, for the living god: when shall i come and appear before god?
my tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually say unto me, where is thy god?
why art thou cast down, o my soul?
and why art thou disquieted in me?
i will say unto god my rock, why hast thou forgotten me?
why go i mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
as with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me; while they say daily unto me, where is thy god?
why art thou cast down, o my soul?
and why art thou disquieted within me?
for thou art the god of my strength: why dost thou cast me off?why go i mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
why art thou cast down, o my soul?
and why art thou disquieted within me?
if we have forgotten the name of our god, or stretched out our hands to a strange god;shall not god search this out?
awake, why sleepest thou, o lord?
wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction and our oppression?
wherefore should i fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about?
will i eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?
but unto the wicked god saith, what hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth?
why boastest thou thyself in mischief, o mighty man?
have the workers of iniquity no knowledge?
shall they escape by iniquity?
thou tellest my wanderings: put thou my tears into thy bottle: are they not in thy book?
for thou hast delivered my soul from death: wilt not thou deliver my feet from falling, that i may walk before god in the light of the living?
do ye indeed speak righteousness, o congregation?
do ye judge uprightly, o ye sons of men?
behold, they belch out with their mouth: swords are in their lips: for who, say they, doth hear?
who will bring me into the strong city?
who will lead me into edom?
wilt not thou, o god, which hadst cast us off?
and thou, o god, which didst not go out with our armies?
how long will ye imagine mischief against a man?
they encourage themselves in an evil matter: they commune of laying snares privily; they say, who shall see them?
why leap ye, ye high hills?
and they say, how doth god know?
and is there knowledge in the most high?
whom have i in heaven but thee?
o god, why hast thou cast us off for ever?
why doth thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture?
o god, how long shall the adversary reproach?
shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever?
why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand?
thou, even thou, art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry?
will the lord cast off for ever?
and will he be favourable no more?
is his mercy clean gone for ever?
doth his promise fail for evermore?
hath god forgotten to be gracious?
hath he in anger shut up his tender mercies?
thy way, o god, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a god as our god?
yea, they spake against god; they said, can god furnish a table in the wilderness?
behold, he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed; can he give bread also?
can he provide flesh for his people?
how long, lord?
wilt thou be angry for ever?
shall thy jealousy burn like fire?
wherefore should the heathen say, where is their god?
o lord god of hosts, how long wilt thou be angry against the prayer of thy people?
why hast thou then broken down her hedges, so that all they which pass by the way do pluck her?
how long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked?
wilt thou be angry with us for ever?
wilt thou draw out thine anger to all generations?
wilt thou not revive us again: that thy people may rejoice in thee?
wilt thou shew wonders to the dead?
shall the dead arise and praise thee?
shall thy lovingkindness be declared in the grave?
or thy faithfulness in destruction?
shall thy wonders be known in the dark?
and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?
lord, why castest thou off my soul?
why hidest thou thy face from me?
for who in the heaven can be compared unto the lord?
who among the sons of the mighty can be likened unto the lord?
o lord god of hosts, who is a strong lord like unto thee?
or to thy faithfulness round about thee?
how long, lord?
wilt thou hide thyself for ever?
shall thy wrath burn like fire?
remember how short my time is: wherefore hast thou made all men in vain?
what man is he that liveth, and shall not see death?
shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave?
lord, where are thy former lovingkindnesses, which thou swarest unto david in thy truth?
who knoweth the power of thine anger?
return, o lord, how long?
lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?
how long shall they utter and speak hard things?
and all the workers of iniquity boast themselves?
understand, ye brutish among the people: and ye fools, when will ye be wise?
he that planted the ear, shall he not hear?
he that formed the eye, shall he not see?
he that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct?
he that teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know?
who will rise up for me against the evildoers?
or who will stand up for me against the workers of iniquity?
shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frameth mischief by a law?
o when wilt thou come unto me?
who can utter the mighty acts of the lord?
who can shew forth all his praise?
who will bring me into the strong city?
who will lead me into edom?
wilt not thou, o god, who hast cast us off?
and wilt not thou, o god, go forth with our hosts?
what ailed thee, o thou sea, that thou fleddest?
thou jordan, that thou wast driven back?
ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams; and ye little hills, like lambs?
wherefore should the heathen say, where is now their god?
what shall i render unto the lord for all his benefits toward me?
the lord is on my side; i will not fear: what can man do unto me?
wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way?
mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, when wilt thou comfort me?
how many are the days of thy servant?
when wilt thou execute judgment on them that persecute me?
what shall be given unto thee?
or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue?
if thou, lord, shouldest mark iniquities, o lord, who shall stand?
how shall we sing the lord's song in a strange land?
whither shall i go from thy spirit?
or whither shall i flee from thy presence?
do not i hate them, o lord, that hate thee?
and am not i grieved with those that rise up against thee?
he casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold?
wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in the streets: she crieth in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the gates: in the city she uttereth her words, saying, how long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity?
and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge?
and why wilt thou, my son, be ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger?
how long wilt thou sleep, o sluggard?
when wilt thou arise out of thy sleep?
can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned?can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burned?
doth not wisdom cry?
and understanding put forth her voice?
do they not err that devise evil?
hell and destruction are before the lord: how much more then the hearts of the children of men?
wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he hath no heart to it?
the spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear?
all the brethren of the poor do hate him: how much more do his friends go far from him?
most men will proclaim every one his own goodness: but a faithful man who can find?
who can say, i have made my heart clean, i am pure from my sin?
man's goings are of the lord; how can a man then understand his own way?
the sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how much more, when he bringeth it with a wicked mind?
have not i written to thee excellent things in counsels and knowledge, that i might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth; that thou mightest answer the words of truth to them that send unto thee?
if thou hast nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed from under thee?
seest thou a man diligent in his business?
wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not?
who hath woe?
who hath sorrow?
who hath contentions?
who hath babbling?
who hath wounds without cause?
who hath redness of eyes?
they have stricken me, shalt thou say, and i was not sick; they have beaten me, and i felt it not: when shall i awake?
if thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain; if thou sayest, behold, we knew it not; doth not he that pondereth the heart consider it?
and he that keepeth thy soul, doth not he know it?
and shall not he render to every man according to his works?
my son, fear thou the lord and the king: and meddle not with them that are given to change: for their calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knoweth the ruin of them both?
hast thou found honey?
seest thou a man wise in his own conceit?
as a mad man who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death, so is the man that deceiveth his neighbour, and saith, am not i in sport?
wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is able to stand before envy?
for riches are not for ever: and doth the crown endure to every generation?
seest thou a man that is hasty in his words?
who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended?
who hath gathered the wind in his fists?
who hath bound the waters in a garment?
who hath established all the ends of the earth?
what is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou canst tell?
two things have i required of thee; deny me them not before i die: remove far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me: lest i be full, and deny thee, and say, who is the lord?
what, my son?
and what, the son of my womb?
and what, the son of my vows?
who can find a virtuous woman?
what profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under the sun?
is there any thing whereof it may be said, see, this is new?
i said of laughter, it is mad: and of mirth, what doeth it?
and i turned myself to behold wisdom, and madness, and folly: for what can the man do that cometh after the king?
then said i in my heart, as it happeneth to the fool, so it happeneth even to me; and why was i then more wise?
and how dieth the wise man?
and who knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool?
for what hath man of all his labour, and of the vexation of his heart, wherein he hath laboured under the sun?
for who can eat, or who else can hasten hereunto, more than i?
what profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth?
who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and the spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth?
wherefore i perceive that there is nothing better, than that a man should rejoice in his own works; for that is his portion: for who shall bring him to see what shall be after him?
there is one alone, and there is not a second; yea, he hath neither child nor brother: yet is there no end of all his labour; neither is his eye satisfied with riches; neither saith he, for whom do i labour, and bereave my soul of good?
again, if two lie together, then they have heat: but how can one be warm alone?
suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou before the angel, that it was an error: wherefore should god be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?
when goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their eyes?
and this also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came, so shall he go: and what profit hath he that hath laboured for the wind?
yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, yet hath he seen no good: do not all go to one place?
for what hath the wise more than the fool?
what hath the poor, that knoweth to walk before the living?
seeing there be many things that increase vanity, what is man the better?
for who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the days of his vain life which he spendeth as a shadow?
for who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?
say not thou, what is the cause that the former days were better than these?
consider the work of god: for who can make that straight, which he hath made crooked?
be not righteous over much; neither make thyself over wise: why shouldest thou destroy thyself ?
be not over much wicked, neither be thou foolish: why shouldest thou die before thy time?
that which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out?
who is as the wise man?
and who knoweth the interpretation of a thing?
where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say unto him, what doest thou?
for he knoweth not that which shall be: for who can tell him when it shall be?
a fool also is full of words: a man cannot tell what shall be; and what shall be after him, who can tell him?
tell me, o thou whom my soul loveth, where thou feedest, where thou makest thy flock to rest at noon: for why should i be as one that turneth aside by the flocks of thy companions?
the watchmen that go about the city found me: to whom i said, saw ye him whom my soul loveth?
who is this that cometh out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?
i have put off my coat; how shall i put it on?
i have washed my feet; how shall i defile them?
what is thy beloved more than another beloved, o thou fairest among women?
what is thy beloved more than another beloved, that thou dost so charge us?
whither is thy beloved gone, o thou fairest among women?
whither is thy beloved turned aside?
who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?
what will ye see in the shulamite?
who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?
we have a little sister, and she hath no breasts: what shall we do for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?
why should ye be stricken any more?
to what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me?
when ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand, to tread my courts?
cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of ?
what mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor?
what could have been done more to my vineyard, that i have not done in it?
wherefore, when i looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?
also i heard the voice of the lord, saying, whom shall i send, and who will go for us?
then said i, lord, how long?
and he said, hear ye now, o house of david; is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my god also?
and when they shall say unto you, seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should not a people seek unto their god?
for the living to the dead?and what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far?
to whom will ye flee for help?and where will ye leave your glory?
for he saith, are not my princes altogether kings?
is not calno as carchemish?
is not hamath as arpad?
is not samaria as damascus?
as my hand hath found the kingdoms of the idols, and whose graven images did excel them of jerusalem and of samaria;
shall i not, as i have done unto samaria and her idols, so do to jerusalem and her idols?
shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith?
or shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it?
all they shall speak and say unto thee, art thou also become weak as we?
art thou become like unto us?
they that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee, saying, is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms; that made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners?
for the lord of hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it?and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?
what shall one then answer the messengers of the nation?
surely the princes of zoan are fools, the counsel of the wise counsellors of pharaoh is become brutish: how say ye unto pharaoh, i am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings?
where are they?
where are thy wise men?
and the inhabitant of this isle shall say in that day, behold, such is our expectation, whither we flee for help to be delivered from the king of assyria: and how shall we escape?
he calleth to me out of seir, watchman, what of the night?
watchman, what of the night?
what aileth thee now, that thou art wholly gone up to the housetops?
thus saith the lord god of hosts, go, get thee unto this treasurer, even unto shebna, which is over the house, and say,
what hast thou here?
and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed thee out a sepulchre here, as he that heweth him out a sepulchre on high, and that graveth an habitation for himself in a rock?
is this your joyous city, whose antiquity is of ancient days?
who hath taken this counsel against tyre, the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers are the honourable of the earth?
fury is not in me: who would set the briers and thorns against me in battle?
hath he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him?
or is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him?
whom shall he teach knowledge?
and whom shall he make to understand doctrine?
doth the plowman plow all day to sow?
doth he open and break the clods of his ground?
when he hath made plain the face thereof, doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in the principal wheat and the appointed barley and the rie in their place?
woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, who seeth us?
and who knoweth us?
surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the potter's clay: for shall the work say of him that made it, he made me not?
or shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, he had no understanding?
is it not yet a very little while, and lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest?
who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire?
who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?
where is the scribe?
where is the receiver?
where is he that counted the towers?
and rabshakeh said unto them, say ye now to hezekiah, thus saith the great king, the king of assyria, what confidence is this wherein thou trustest?
i say, sayest thou, (but they are but vain words) i have counsel and strength for war: now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest against me?
but if thou say to me, we trust in the lord our god: is it not he, whose high places and whose altars hezekiah hath taken away, and said to judah and to jerusalem, ye shall worship before this altar?
how then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master's servants, and put thy trust on egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
and am i now come up without the lord against this land to destroy it?
but rabshakeh said, hath my master sent me to thy master and to thee to speak these words?
hath he not sent me to the men that sit upon the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own piss with you?
hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king of assyria?
where are the gods of hamath and arphad?
where are the gods of sepharvaim?
and have they delivered samaria out of my hand?
who are they among all the gods of these lands, that have delivered their land out of my hand, that the lord should deliver jerusalem out of my hand?
behold, thou hast heard what the kings of assyria have done to all lands by destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered?have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have destroyed, as gozan, and haran, and rezeph, and the children of eden which were in telassar?
where is the king of hamath, and the king of arphad, and the king of the city of sepharvaim, hena, and ivah?
whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed?
and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high?
hast thou not heard long ago, how i have done it; and of ancient times, that i have formed it?
what shall i say?
hezekiah also had said, what is the sign that i shall go up to the house of the lord?
then came isaiah the prophet unto king hezekiah, and said unto him, what said these men?
and from whence came they unto thee?
then said he, what have they seen in thine house?
and he said, what shall i cry?
who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance?
who hath directed the spirit of the lord, or being his counsellor hath taught him?
with whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding?
to whom then will ye liken god?
or what likeness will ye compare unto him?
have ye not known?
have ye not heard?
hath it not been told you from the beginning?
have ye not understood from the foundations of the earth?
to whom then will ye liken me, or shall i be equal?
why sayest thou, o jacob, and speakest, o israel, my way is hid from the lord, and my judgment is passed over from my god?
hast thou not known?
hast thou not heard, that the everlasting god, the lord, the creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary?
who raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to his foot, gave the nations before him, and made him rule over kings?
who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning?
who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know?
and beforetime, that we may say, he is righteous?
who is blind, but my servant?
or deaf, as my messenger that i sent?
who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the lord's servant?
who among you will give ear to this?
who will hearken and hear for the time to come?
who gave jacob for a spoil, and israel to the robbers?
did not the lord, he against whom we have sinned?
let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things?
yea, before the day was i am he; and there is none that can deliver out of my hand: i will work, and who shall let it?
behold, i will do a new thing; now it shall spring forth; shall ye not know it?
and who, as i, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in order for me, since i appointed the ancient people?
fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not i told thee from that time, and have declared it?
is there a god beside me?
who hath formed a god, or molten a graven image that is profitable for nothing?
and none considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say, i have burned part of it in the fire; yea, also i have baked bread upon the coals thereof; i have roasted flesh, and eaten it: and shall i make the residue thereof an abomination?shall i fall down to the stock of a tree?
he feedeth on ashes: a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand?
shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, what makest thou?
or thy work, he hath no hands? woe unto him that saith unto his father, what begettest thou?
or to the woman, what hast thou brought forth?
tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel together: who hath declared this from ancient time?
who hath told it from that time?
have not i the lord? to whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me, that we may be like?
thou hast heard, see all this; and will not ye declare it?
for mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will i do it: for how should my name be polluted?
all ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them hath declared these things?
can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb?
then shalt thou say in thine heart, who hath begotten me these, seeing i have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro?
and who hath brought up these?
behold, i was left alone; these, where had they been?
shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive delivered?
thus saith the lord, where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, whom i have put away?
or which of my creditors is it to whom i have sold you?
wherefore, when i came, was there no man?
when i called, was there none to answer?
is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem?
or have i no power to deliver?
he is near that justifieth me; who will contend with me?
let us stand together: who is mine adversary?
behold, the lord god will help me; who is he that shall condemn me?
who is among you that feareth the lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light?
art thou not it that hath cut rahab, and wounded the dragon?
art thou not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the great deep; that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over?
i, even i, am he that comforteth you: who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man which shall be made as grass; and forgettest the lord thy maker, that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth; and hast feared continually every day because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy?
and where is the fury of the oppressor?
these two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for thee?
desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by whom shall i comfort thee?
now therefore, what have i here, saith the lord, that my people is taken away for nought?
who hath believed our report?
and to whom is the arm of the lord revealed?
he was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation?
wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread?
and your labour for that which satisfieth not?
against whom do ye sport yourselves?
against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue?
enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks?
should i receive comfort in these?
and of whom hast thou been afraid or feared, that thou hast lied, and hast not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart?
have not i held my peace even of old, and thou fearest me not?
wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not?
wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge?
is it such a fast that i have chosen?
a day for a man to afflict his soul?
is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him?
wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the lord?
is not this the fast that i have chosen?
to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house?
when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?
who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows?
who is this that cometh from edom, with dyed garments from bozrah?
this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength?
wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat?
then he remembered the days of old, moses, and his people, saying, where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherd of his flock?
where is he that put his holy spirit within him?
that led them by the right hand of moses with his glorious arm, dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting name?
that led them through the deep, as an horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble?
look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward me?
are they restrained?
o lord, why hast thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear?
wilt thou refrain thyself for these things, o lord?
wilt thou hold thy peace, and afflict us very sore?
thus saith the lord, the heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: where is the house that ye build unto me?
and where is the place of my rest?
who hath heard such a thing?
who hath seen such things?
shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day?
or shall a nation be born at once?
shall i bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth?
saith the lord: shall i cause to bring forth, and shut the womb?
moreover the word of the lord came unto me, saying, jeremiah, what seest thou?
and the word of the lord came unto me the second time, saying, what seest thou?
hear ye the word of the lord, o house of jacob, and all the families of the house of israel: thus saith the lord, what iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain?
neither said they, where is the lord that brought us up out of the land of egypt, that led us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought, and of the shadow of death, through a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt?
the priests said not, where is the lord?
hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods?
is israel a servant?
is he a homeborn slave?
why is he spoiled?
hast thou not procured this unto thyself, in that thou hast forsaken the lord thy god, when he led thee by the way?
and now what hast thou to do in the way of egypt, to drink the waters of sihor?
or what hast thou to do in the way of assyria, to drink the waters of the river?
yet i had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed: how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me?
how canst thou say, i am not polluted, i have not gone after baalim?
see thy way in the valley, know what thou hast done: thou art a swift dromedary traversing her ways; a wild ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; in her occasion who can turn her away?
but where are thy gods that thou hast made thee?
wherefore will ye plead with me?
have i been a wilderness unto israel?
a land of darkness?
wherefore say my people, we are lords; we will come no more unto thee?
can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire?
why trimmest thou thy way to seek love?
why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way?
they say, if a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man's, shall he return unto her again?
shall not that land be greatly polluted?
wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, my father, thou art the guide of my youth?
will he reserve his anger for ever?
will he keep it to the end?
the lord said also unto me in the days of josiah the king, hast thou seen that which backsliding israel hath done?
but i said, how shall i put thee among the children, and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the hosts of nations?
how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?
how long shall i see the standard, and hear the sound of the trumpet?
and when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do?
o lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth?
how shall i pardon thee for this?
shall i not visit for these things?
saith the lord: and shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?
and it shall come to pass, when ye shall say, wherefore doeth the lord our god all these things unto us?
declare this in the house of jacob, and publish it in judah, saying, hear now this, o foolish people, and without understanding; which have eyes, and see not; which have ears, and hear not: fear ye not me?
saith the lord: will ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the sea by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it: and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it?
shall i not visit for these things?
saith the lord: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?
a wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land; the prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?
to whom shall i speak, and give warning, that they may hear?
were they ashamed when they had committed abomination?
to what purpose cometh there to me incense from sheba, and the sweet cane from a far country?
will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not; and come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, we are delivered to do all these abominations?
is this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes?
seest thou not what they do in the cities of judah and in the streets of jerusalem?
do they provoke me to anger?
saith the lord: do they not provoke themselves to the confusion of their own faces?
moreover thou shalt say unto them, thus saith the lord; shall they fall, and not arise?
shall he turn away, and not return?
why then is this people of jerusalem slidden back by a perpetual backsliding?
i hearkened and heard, but they spake not aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have i done?
how do ye say, we are wise, and the law of the lord is with us?
the wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken: lo, they have rejected the word of the lord; and what wisdom is in them?
were they ashamed when they had committed abomination?
why do we sit still?
behold the voice of the cry of the daughter of my people because of them that dwell in a far country: is not the lord in zion?
is not her king in her?
why have they provoked me to anger with their graven images, and with strange vanities?
is there no balm in gilead; is there no physician there?
why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?
therefore thus saith the lord of hosts, behold, i will melt them, and try them; for how shall i do for the daughter of my people?
shall i not visit them for these things?
saith the lord: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?
who is the wise man, that may understand this?
and who is he to whom the mouth of the lord hath spoken, that he may declare it, for what the land perisheth and is burned up like a wilderness, that none passeth through?
who would not fear thee, o king of nations?
what hath my beloved to do in mine house, seeing she hath wrought lewdness with many, and the holy flesh is passed from thee?
righteous art thou, o lord, when i plead with thee: yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments: wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper?
wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously? how long shall the land mourn, and the herbs of every field wither, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein?
if thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou contend with horses?
and if in the land of peace, wherein thou trustedst, they wearied thee, then how wilt thou do in the swelling of jordan?
therefore thou shalt speak unto them this word; thus saith the lord god of israel, every bottle shall be filled with wine: and they shall say unto thee, do we not certainly know that every bottle shall be filled with wine?
lift up your eyes, and behold them that come from the north: where is the flock that was given thee, thy beautiful flock? what wilt thou say when he shall punish thee?
for thou hast taught them to be captains, and as chief over thee: shall not sorrows take thee, as a woman in travail?
and if thou say in thine heart, wherefore come these things upon me?
can the ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots?
wilt thou not be made clean?
when shall it once be?
o the hope of israel, the saviour thereof in time of trouble, why shouldest thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man that turneth aside to tarry for a night?
why shouldest thou be as a man astonied, as a mighty man that cannot save?
hast thou utterly rejected judah?
hath thy soul lothed zion?
why hast thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us?
are there any among the vanities of the gentiles that can cause rain?
or can the heavens give showers?
art not thou he, o lord our god?
and it shall come to pass, if they say unto thee, whither shall we go forth?
for who shall have pity upon thee, o jerusalem?
or who shall bemoan thee?
or who shall go aside to ask how thou doest?
shall iron break the northern iron and the steel?
why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuseth to be healed?
wilt thou be altogether unto me as a liar, and as waters that fail?
and it shall come to pass, when thou shalt shew this people all these words, and they shall say unto thee, wherefore hath the lord pronounced all this great evil against us?
or what is our iniquity?
or what is our sin that we have committed against the lord our god?
shall a man make gods unto himself, and they are no gods?
the heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: who can know it?
behold, they say unto me, where is the word of the lord?
then the word of the lord came to me, saying, o house of israel, cannot i do with you as this potter?
will a man leave the snow of lebanon which cometh from the rock of the field?
or shall the cold flowing waters that come from another place be forsaken?
shall evil be recompensed for good?
wherefore came i forth out of the womb to see labour and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame?
behold, i am against thee, o inhabitant of the valley, and rock of the plain, saith the lord; which say, who shall come down against us?
or who shall enter into our habitations?
and many nations shall pass by this city, and they shall say every man to his neighbour, wherefore hath the lord done thus unto this great city?
shalt thou reign, because thou closest thyself in cedar?
did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well with him?
he judged the cause of the poor and needy; then it was well with him: was not this to know me?
is this man coniah a despised broken idol?
is he a vessel wherein is no pleasure?
wherefore are they cast out, he and his seed, and are cast into a land which they know not?
for who hath stood in the counsel of the lord, and hath perceived and heard his word?
who hath marked his word, and heard it?
am i a god at hand, saith the lord, and not a god afar off?can any hide himself in secret places that i shall not see him?
do not i fill heaven and earth?
how long shall this be in the heart of the prophets that prophesy lies?
what is the chaff to the wheat?
is not my word like as a fire?
saith the lord; and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?
and when this people, or the prophet, or a priest, shall ask thee, saying, what is the burden of the lord?
thou shalt then say unto them, what burden?
thus shall ye say every one to his neighbour, and every one to his brother, what hath the lord answered?
and, what hath the lord spoken?
thus shalt thou say to the prophet, what hath the lord answered thee?
and, what hath the lord spoken?
then said the lord unto me, what seest thou, jeremiah?
for, lo, i begin to bring evil on the city which is called by my name, and should ye be utterly unpunished?
why hast thou prophesied in the name of the lord, saying, this house shall be like shiloh, and this city shall be desolate without an inhabitant?
did hezekiah king of judah and all judah put him at all to death?
did he not fear the lord, and besought the lord, and the lord repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them?
why will ye die, thou and thy people, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as the lord hath spoken against the nation that will not serve the king of babylon?
hearken not unto them; serve the king of babylon, and live: wherefore should this city be laid waste?
now therefore why hast thou not reproved jeremiah of anathoth, which maketh himself a prophet to you?
ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child?wherefore do i see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?
why criest thou for thine affliction?
and their nobles shall be of themselves, and their governor shall proceed from the midst of them; and i will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me: for who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me?
is ephraim my dear son?
is he a pleasant child?
how long wilt thou go about, o thou backsliding daughter?
then came the word of the lord unto jeremiah, saying,
behold, i am the lord, the god of all flesh: is there any thing too hard for me?
moreover the word of the lord came to jeremiah, saying,
considerest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, the two families which the lord hath chosen, he hath even cast them off?
then came the word of the lord unto jeremiah, saying, thus saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; go and tell the men of judah and the inhabitants of jerusalem, will ye not receive instruction to hearken to my words?
and they asked baruch, saying, tell us now, how didst thou write all these words at his mouth?
and thou shalt say to jehoiakim king of judah, thus saith the lord; thou hast burned this roll, saying, why hast thou written therein, saying, the king of babylon shall certainly come and destroy this land, and shall cause to cease from thence man and beast?
when jeremiah was entered into the dungeon, and into the cabins, and jeremiah had remained there many days; then zedekiah the king sent, and took him out: and the king asked him secretly in his house, and said, is there any word from the lord?
moreover jeremiah said unto king zedekiah, what have i offended against thee, or against thy servants, or against this people, that ye have put me in prison?
where are now your prophets which prophesied unto you, saying, the king of babylon shall not come against you, nor against this land?
then jeremiah said unto zedekiah, if i declare it unto thee, wilt thou not surely put me to death?
and if i give thee counsel, wilt thou not hearken unto me?
moreover johanan the son of kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were in the fields, came to gedaliah to mizpah, and said unto him, dost thou certainly know that baalis the king of the ammonites hath sent ishmael the son of nethaniah to slay thee?
then johanan the son of kareah spake to gedaliah in mizpah secretly saying, let me go, i pray thee, and i will slay ishmael the son of nethaniah, and no man shall know it: wherefore should he slay thee, that all the jews which are gathered unto thee should be scattered, and the remnant in judah perish?
therefore now thus saith the lord, the god of hosts, the god of israel; wherefore commit ye this great evil against your souls, to cut off from you man and woman, child and suckling, out of judah, to leave you none to remain; in that ye provoke me unto wrath with the works of your hands, burning incense unto other gods in the land of egypt, whither ye be gone to dwell, that ye might cut yourselves off, and that ye might be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth?
have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, and the wickedness of the kings of judah, and the wickedness of their wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives, which they have committed in the land of judah, and in the streets of jerusalem?
and when we burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured out drink offerings unto her, did we make her cakes to worship her, and pour out drink offerings unto her, without our men?
then jeremiah said unto all the people, to the men, and to the women, and to all the people which had given him that answer, saying, the incense that ye burned in the cities of judah, and in the streets of jerusalem, ye, and your fathers, your kings, and your princes, and the people of the land, did not the lord remember them, and came it not into his mind?
and seekest thou great things for thyself?
wherefore have i seen them dismayed and turned away back?
who is this that cometh up as a flood, whose waters are moved as the rivers?
why are thy valiant men swept away?
baldness is come upon gaza; ashkelon is cut off with the remnant of their valley: how long wilt thou cut thyself?
o thou sword of the lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet?
how can it be quiet, seeing the lord hath given it a charge against ashkelon, and against the sea shore?
how say ye, we are mighty and strong men for the war?
o inhabitant of aroer, stand by the way, and espy; ask him that fleeth, and her that escapeth, and say, what is done?
for was not israel a derision unto thee?
was he found among thieves?
concerning the ammonites, thus saith the lord; hath israel no sons?
hath he no heir?
why then doth their king inherit gad, and his people dwell in his cities?
wherefore gloriest thou in the valleys, thy flowing valley, o backsliding daughter?
that trusted in her treasures, saying, who shall come unto me?
concerning edom, thus saith the lord of hosts; is wisdom no more in teman?
is counsel perished from the prudent?
is their wisdom vanished?
if grapegatherers come to thee, would they not leave some gleaning grapes?
for thus saith the lord; behold, they whose judgment was not to drink of the cup have assuredly drunken; and art thou he that shall altogether go unpunished?
behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of jordan against the habitation of the strong: but i will suddenly make him run away from her: and who is a chosen man, that i may appoint over her?for who is like me?
and who will appoint me the time?
and who is that shepherd that will stand before me?
behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of jordan unto the habitation of the strong: but i will make them suddenly run away from her: and who is a chosen man, that i may appoint over her?for who is like me?
and who will appoint me the time?
and who is that shepherd that will stand before me?
is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by?
they say to their mothers, where is corn and wine?
what thing shall i take to witness for thee?
what thing shall i liken to thee, o daughter of jerusalem?
what shall i equal to thee, that i may comfort thee, o virgin daughter of zion?
for thy breach is great like the sea: who can heal thee?
all that pass by clap their hands at thee; they hiss and wag their head at the daughter of jerusalem, saying, is this the city that men call the perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth?
shall the women eat their fruit, and children of a span long?
shall the priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the lord?
who is he that saith, and it cometh to pass, when the lord commandeth it not?
out of the mouth of the most high proceedeth not evil and good?
wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?
wherefore dost thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time?
he said furthermore unto me, son of man, seest thou what they do?even the great abominations that the house of israel committeth here, that i should go far off from my sanctuary?
then said he unto me, son of man, hast thou seen what the ancients of the house of israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery?
then said he unto me, hast thou seen this, o son of man?
then he said unto me, hast thou seen this, o son of man?
is it a light thing to the house of judah that they commit the abominations which they commit here?
wilt thou destroy all the residue of israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon jerusalem?
wilt thou make a full end of the remnant of israel?
and in the morning came the word of the lord unto me, saying, son of man, hath not the house of israel, the rebellious house, said unto thee, what doest thou?
and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, son of man, what is that proverb that ye have in the land of israel, saying, the days are prolonged, and every vision faileth?
have ye not seen a vain vision, and have ye not spoken a lying divination, whereas ye say, the lord saith it; albeit i have not spoken?
lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you, where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?
will ye hunt the souls of my people, and will ye save the souls alive that come unto you?
and will ye pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live, by your lying to my people that hear your lies?
and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, son of man, these men have set up their idols in their heart, and put the stumblingblock of their iniquity before their face: should i be enquired of at all by them?
for thus saith the lord god; how much more when i send my four sore judgments upon jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the noisome beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast?
and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, son of man, what is the vine tree more than any tree, or than a branch which is among the trees of the forest?
shall wood be taken thereof to do any work?
or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?
is it meet for any work?
behold, when it was whole, it was meet for no work: how much less shall it be meet yet for any work, when the fire hath devoured it, and it is burned?
is this of thy whoredoms a small matter, that thou hast slain my children, and delivered them to cause them to pass through the fire for them?
say thou, thus saith the lord god; shall it prosper?
shall he not pull up the roots thereof, and cut off the fruit thereof, that it wither?
yea, behold, being planted, shall it prosper?
shall it not utterly wither, when the east wind toucheth it?
moreover the word of the lord came unto me, saying, say now to the rebellious house, know ye not what these things mean?
shall he prosper?
shall he escape that doeth such things?
or shall he break the covenant, and be delivered?
the word of the lord came unto me again, saying, what mean ye, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of israel, saying, the fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge?
if he beget a son that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and that doeth the like to any one of these things, and that doeth not any of those duties, but even hath eaten upon the mountains, and defiled his neighbour's wife, hath oppressed the poor and needy, hath spoiled by violence, hath not restored the pledge, and hath lifted up his eyes to the idols, hath committed abomination,
hath given forth upon usury, and hath taken increase: shall he then live?
yet say ye, why?
doth not the son bear the iniquity of the father?
have i any pleasure at all that the wicked should die?
saith the lord god: and not that he should return from his ways, and live?but when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and doeth according to all the abominations that the wicked man doeth, shall he live?
hear now, o house of israel; is not my way equal?
are not your ways unequal?o house of israel, are not my ways equal?
are not your ways unequal?
cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will ye die, o house of israel?
moreover take thou up a lamentation for the princes of israel, and say, what is thy mother?
then came the word of the lord unto me, saying, son of man, speak unto the elders of israel, and say unto them, thus saith the lord god; are ye come to enquire of me?
wilt thou judge them, son of man, wilt thou judge them?
then i said unto them, what is the high place whereunto ye go?
wherefore say unto the house of israel, thus saith the lord god; are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers?
and commit ye whoredom after their abominations?
for when ye offer your gifts, when ye make your sons to pass through the fire, ye pollute yourselves with all your idols, even unto this day: and shall i be enquired of by you, o house of israel?
they say of me, doth he not speak parables?
and it shall be, when they say unto thee, wherefore sighest thou?
again the word of the lord came unto me, saying, son of man, prophesy, and say, thus saith the lord; say, a sword, a sword is sharpened, and also furbished: it is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is furbished that it may glitter: should we then make mirth?
because it is a trial, and what if the sword contemn even the rod?
shall i cause it to return into his sheath?
moreover the word of the lord came unto me, saying, now, thou son of man, wilt thou judge, wilt thou judge the bloody city?
can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the days that i shall deal with thee?
the lord said moreover unto me; son of man, wilt thou judge aholah and aholibah?
then said i unto her that was old in adulteries, will they now commit whoredoms with her, and she with them?
and the people said unto me, wilt thou not tell us what these things are to us, that thou doest so?
also, thou son of man, shall it not be in the day when i take from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, their sons and their daughters, that he that escapeth in that day shall come unto thee, to cause thee to hear it with thine ears?
thus saith the lord god to tyrus; shall not the isles shake at the sound of thy fall, when the wounded cry, when the slaughter is made in the midst of thee?
and in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, saying, what city is like tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the sea?
wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee, i am god?
and it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the third month, in the first day of the month, that the word of the lord came unto me, saying, son of man, speak unto pharaoh king of egypt, and to his multitude; whom art thou like in thy greatness?
to whom art thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the trees of eden?
whom dost thou pass in beauty?
therefore, o thou son of man, speak unto the house of israel; thus ye speak, saying, if our transgressions and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in them, how should we then live?
say unto them, as i live, saith the lord god, i have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, o house of israel?
wherefore say unto them, thus saith the lord god; ye eat with the blood, and lift up your eyes toward your idols, and shed blood: and shall ye possess the land?
ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbour's wife: and shall ye possess the land?
should not the shepherds feed the flocks?
seemeth it a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures?
and to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet?
and he said unto me, son of man, can these bones live?
and when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying, wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these?
sheba, and dedan, and the merchants of tarshish, with all the young lions thereof, shall say unto thee, art thou come to take a spoil?
hast thou gathered thy company to take a prey?
to carry away silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to take a great spoil?therefore, son of man, prophesy and say unto gog, thus saith the lord god; in that day when my people of israel dwelleth safely, shalt thou not know it?
thus saith the lord god; art thou he of whom i have spoken in old time by my servants the prophets of israel, which prophesied in those days many years that i would bring thee against them?
and he said unto me, son of man, hast thou seen this?
and the prince of the eunuchs said unto daniel, i fear my lord the king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink: for why should he see your faces worse liking than the children which are of your sort?
then daniel answered with counsel and wisdom to arioch the captain of the king's guard, which was gone forth to slay the wise men of babylon: he answered and said to arioch the king's captain, why is the decree so hasty from the king?
the king answered and said to daniel, whose name was belteshazzar, art thou able to make known unto me the dream which i have seen, and the interpretation thereof?
nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, is it true, o shadrach, meshach, and abednego, do not ye serve my gods, nor worship the golden image which i have set up?
now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the image which i have made; well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; and who is that god that shall deliver you out of my hands?
then nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste, and spake, and said unto his counsellors, did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire?
the king spake, and said, is not this great babylon, that i have built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for the honour of my majesty?
and at the end of the days i nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and i blessed the most high, and i praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation: and all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, what doest thou?
and the king spake and said unto daniel, art thou that daniel, which art of the children of the captivity of judah, whom the king my father brought out of jewry?
then they came near, and spake before the king concerning the king's decree; hast thou not signed a decree, that every man that shall ask a petition of any god or man within thirty days, save of thee, o king, shall be cast into the den of lions?
and when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto daniel: and the king spake and said to daniel, o daniel, servant of the living god, is thy god, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?
then i heard one saint speaking, and another saint said unto that certain saint which spake, how long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot?
for how can the servant of this my lord talk with this my lord?
then said he, knowest thou wherefore i come unto thee?
and one said to the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river, how long shall it be to the end of these wonders?
and i heard, but i understood not: then said i, o my lord, what shall be the end of these things?
o ephraim, what shall i do unto thee?
o judah, what shall i do unto thee?
thy calf, o samaria, hath cast thee off; mine anger is kindled against them: how long will it be ere they attain to innocency?
what will ye do in the solemn day, and in the day of the feast of the lord?
give them, o lord: what wilt thou give?
for now they shall say, we have no king, because we feared not the lord; what then should a king do to us?
how shall i give thee up, ephraim?
how shall i deliver thee, israel?
how shall i make thee as admah?
how shall i set thee as zeboim?
is there iniquity in gilead?
i will be thy king: where is any other that may save thee in all thy cities?
and thy judges of whom thou saidst, give me a king and princes?
ephraim shall say, what have i to do any more with idols?
who is wise, and he shall understand these things?
prudent, and he shall know them?
hath this been in your days, or even in the days of your fathers?
is not the meat cut off before our eyes, yea, joy and gladness from the house of our god?
the earth shall quake before them; the heavens shall tremble: the sun and the moon shall be dark, and the stars shall withdraw their shining: and the lord shall utter his voice before his army: for his camp is very great: for he is strong that executeth his word: for the day of the lord is great and very terrible; and who can abide it?
who knoweth if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him; even a meat offering and a drink offering unto the lord your god?
let the priests, the ministers of the lord, weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say, spare thy people, o lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say among the people, where is their god?
yea, and what have ye to do with me, o tyre, and zidon, and all the coasts of palestine?
will ye render me a recompence?
is it not even thus, o ye children of israel?
can two walk together, except they be agreed?
will a lion roar in the forest, when he hath no prey?
will a young lion cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing?
can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no gin is for him?
shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at all?
shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid?
shall there be evil in a city, and the lord hath not done it?
the lion hath roared, who will not fear?
the lord god hath spoken, who can but prophesy?
to what end is it for you?
shall not the day of the lord be darkness, and not light?
even very dark, and no brightness in it?
have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness forty years, o house of israel?
pass ye unto calneh, and see; and from thence go ye to hamath the great: then go down to gath of the philistines: be they better than these kingdoms?
or their border greater than your border?
and a man's uncle shall take him up, and he that burneth him, to bring out the bones out of the house, and shall say unto him that is by the sides of the house, is there yet any with thee?
shall horses run upon the rock?
will one plow there with oxen?for ye have turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock: ye which rejoice in a thing of nought, which say, have we not taken to us horns by our own strength?
and it came to pass, that when they had made an end of eating the grass of the land, then i said, o lord god, forgive, i beseech thee: by whom shall jacob arise?
then said i, o lord god, cease, i beseech thee: by whom shall jacob arise?
and the lord said unto me, amos, what seest thou?
and he said, amos, what seest thou?
hear this, o ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of the land to fail, saying, when will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn?
and the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making the ephah small, and the shekel great, and falsifying the balances by deceit?
that we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the wheat?
shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwelleth therein?
are ye not as children of the ethiopians unto me, o children of israel?
have not i brought up israel out of the land of egypt?
and the philistines from caphtor, and the syrians from kir?
the pride of thine heart hath deceived thee, thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high; that saith in his heart, who shall bring me down to the ground?
)would they not have stolen till they had enough?
if the grapegatherers came to thee, would they not leave some grapes?
shall i not in that day, saith the lord, even destroy the wise men out of edom, and understanding out of the mount of esau?
so the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, what meanest thou, o sleeper?
then said they unto him, tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause this evil is upon us; what is thine occupation?
and whence comest thou?
what is thy country?
and of what people art thou?
why hast thou done this?
then said they unto him, what shall we do unto thee, that the sea may be calm unto us?
who can tell if god will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?
and he prayed unto the lord, and said, i pray thee, o lord, was not this my saying, when i was yet in my country?
then said the lord, doest thou well to be angry?
and god said to jonah, doest thou well to be angry for the gourd?
then said the lord, thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it grow; which came up in a night, and perished in a night: and should not i spare nineveh, that great city, wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand; and also much cattle?
what is the transgression of jacob?
is it not samaria?
and what are the high places of judah?
are they not jerusalem?
o thou that art named the house of jacob, is the spirit of the lord straitened?
are these his doings?
do not my words do good to him that walketh uprightly?
and i said, hear, i pray you, o heads of jacob, and ye princes of the house of israel; is it not for you to know judgment?
the heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money: yet will they lean upon the lord, and say, is not the lord among us?
now why dost thou cry out aloud?
is there no king in thee?
is thy counsellor perished?
o my people, what have i done unto thee?
and wherein have i wearied thee?
wherewith shall i come before the lord, and bow myself before the high god?
shall i come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old?
will the lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil?
shall i give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
he hath shewed thee, o man, what is good; and what doth the lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy god?
are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the scant measure that is abominable?
shall i count them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights?
then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, where is the lord thy god?
who is a god like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage?
who can stand before his indignation?
and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger?
what do ye imagine against the lord?
where is the dwelling of the lions, and the feedingplace of the young lions, where the lion, even the old lion, walked, and the lion's whelp, and none made them afraid?
and it shall come to pass, that all they that look upon thee shall flee from thee, and say, nineveh is laid waste: who will bemoan her?whence shall i seek comforters for thee?
art thou better than populous no, that was situate among the rivers, that had the waters round about it, whose rampart was the sea, and her wall was from the sea?
there is no healing of thy bruise; thy wound is grievous: all that hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hands over thee: for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually?
why dost thou shew me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance?
art thou not from everlasting, o lord my god, mine holy one?
thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and canst not look on iniquity: wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal treacherously, and holdest thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he?
and makest men as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things, that have no ruler over them?
shall they therefore empty their net, and not spare continually to slay the nations?
how long?
shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee, and thou shalt be for booties unto them?
behold, is it not of the lord of hosts that the people shall labour in the very fire, and the people shall weary themselves for very vanity?
what profiteth the graven image that the maker thereof hath graven it; the molten image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his work trusteth therein, to make dumb idols?
was the lord displeased against the rivers?
was thine anger against the rivers?
was thy wrath against the sea, that thou didst ride upon thine horses and thy chariots of salvation?
then came the word of the lord by haggai the prophet, saying,
is it time for you, o ye, to dwell in your cieled houses, and this house lie waste?
why?
in the seventh month, in the one and twentieth day of the month, came the word of the lord by the prophet haggai, saying, speak now to zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, governor of judah, and to joshua the son of josedech, the high priest, and to the residue of the people, saying, who is left among you that saw this house in her first glory?
and how do ye see it now?
is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing?
in the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, in the second year of darius, came the word of the lord by haggai the prophet, saying, thus saith the lord of hosts; ask now the priests concerning the law, saying, if one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy?
then said haggai, if one that is unclean by a dead body touch any of these, shall it be unclean?
is the seed yet in the barn?
your fathers, where are they?
and the prophets, do they live for ever?
but my words and my statutes, which i commanded my servants the prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers?
then said i, o my lord, what are these?
then the angel of the lord answered and said, o lord of hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on jerusalem and on the cities of judah, against which thou hast had indignation these threescore and ten years?
and i said unto the angel that talked with me, what be these?
then said i, what come these to do?
then said i, whither goest thou?
and the lord said unto satan, the lord rebuke thee, o satan; even the lord that hath chosen jerusalem rebuke thee: is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?
and said unto me, what seest thou?
so i answered and spake to the angel that talked with me, saying, what are these, my lord?
then the angel that talked with me answered and said unto me, knowest thou not what these be?
who art thou, o great mountain?
for who hath despised the day of small things?
then answered i, and said unto him, what are these two olive trees upon the right side of the candlestick and upon the left side thereof?
and i answered again, and said unto him, what be these two olive branches which through the two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of themselves?
and he answered me and said, knowest thou not what these be?
and he said unto me, what seest thou?
and i said, what is it?
then said i to the angel that talked with me, whither do these bear the ephah?
then i answered and said unto the angel that talked with me, what are these, my lord?
and it came to pass in the fourth year of king darius, that the word of the lord came unto zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth month, even in chisleu; when they had sent unto the house of god sherezer and regemmelech, and their men, to pray before the lord,
and to speak unto the priests which were in the house of the lord of hosts, and to the prophets, saying, should i weep in the fifth month, separating myself, as i have done these so many years?
then came the word of the lord of hosts unto me, saying, speak unto all the people of the land, and to the priests, saying, when ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me?
and when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did not ye eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves?should ye not hear the words which the lord hath cried by the former prophets, when jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, and the cities thereof round about her, when men inhabited the south and the plain?
thus saith the lord of hosts; if it be marvellous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days, should it also be marvellous in mine eyes?
and one shall say unto him, what are these wounds in thine hands?
yet ye say, wherein hast thou loved us?
was not esau jacob's brother?
a son honoureth his father, and a servant his master: if then i be a father, where is mine honour?
and if i be a master, where is my fear?
and ye say, wherein have we despised thy name?
ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar; and ye say, wherein have we polluted thee?
and if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil?
and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil?
offer it now unto thy governor; will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person?
and now, i pray you, beseech god that he will be gracious unto us: this hath been by your means: will he regard your persons?
who is there even among you that would shut the doors for nought?
and ye have snuffed at it, saith the lord of hosts; and ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought an offering: should i accept this of your hand?
have we not all one father?
hath not one god created us?
why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the covenant of our fathers?
yet ye say, wherefore?
and did not he make one?and wherefore one?
yet ye say, wherein have we wearied him?
when ye say, every one that doeth evil is good in the sight of the lord, and he delighteth in them; or, where is the god of judgment?
but who may abide the day of his coming?
and who shall stand when he appeareth?
but ye said, wherein shall we return?
will a man rob god?
but ye say, wherein have we robbed thee?
yet ye say, what have we spoken so much against thee?
ye have said, it is vain to serve god: and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the lord of hosts?
now when jesus was born in bethlehem of judaea in the days of herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to jerusalem, saying, where is he that is born king of the jews?
but when he saw many of the pharisees and sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto them, o generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
but john forbad him, saying, i have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?
ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be salted?
for if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye?
do not even the publicans the same?
and if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others?
do not even the publicans so?
is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?
are ye not much better than they?
which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?
and why take ye thought for raiment?
wherefore, if god so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, o ye of little faith?
therefore take no thought, saying, what shall we eat?
or, what shall we drink?
or, wherewithal shall we be clothed?
and why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?
or how wilt thou say to thy brother, let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye?
or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?
or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?
if ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?
do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?
many will say to me in that day, lord, lord, have we not prophesied in thy name?
and in thy name have cast out devils?
and in thy name done many wonderful works?
and he saith unto them, why are ye fearful, o ye of little faith?
and, behold, they cried out, saying, what have we to do with thee, jesus, thou son of god?
art thou come hither to torment us before the time?
and jesus knowing their thoughts said, wherefore think ye evil in your hearts?
for whether is easier, to say, thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, arise, and walk?
and when the pharisees saw it, they said unto his disciples, why eateth your master with publicans and sinners?
then came to him the disciples of john, saying, why do we and the pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples fast not?
and jesus said unto them, can the children of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them?
and when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him: and jesus saith unto them, believe ye that i am able to do this?
if they have called the master of the house beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household?
are not two sparrows sold for a farthing?
now when john had heard in the prison the works of christ, he sent two of his disciples, and said unto him, art thou he that should come, or do we look for another?
and as they departed, jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning john, what went ye out into the wilderness to see?
a reed shaken with the wind?
but what went ye out for to see?
a man clothed in soft raiment?
but what went ye out for to see?
a prophet?
but whereunto shall i liken this generation?
but he said unto them, have ye not read what david did, when he was an hungred, and they that were with him; how he entered into the house of god, and did eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them which were with him, but only for the priests?
or have ye not read in the law, how that on the sabbath days the priests in the temple profane the sabbath, and are blameless?
and they asked him, saying, is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days?
and he said unto them, what man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it, and lift it out?
how much then is a man better than a sheep?
and all the people were amazed, and said, is not this the son of david?
and jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them, every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand: and if satan cast out satan, he is divided against himself; how shall then his kingdom stand?
and if i by beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast them out?
or else how can one enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong man?
o generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things?
but he answered and said unto him that told him, who is my mother?
and who are my brethren? and the disciples came, and said unto him, why speakest thou unto them in parables?
so the servants of the householder came and said unto him, sir, didst not thou sow good seed in thy field?
from whence then hath it tares?
the servants said unto him, wilt thou then that we go and gather them up?
jesus saith unto them, have ye understood all these things?
and when he was come into his own country, he taught them in their synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said, whence hath this man this wisdom, and these mighty works?
is not this the carpenter's son?
is not his mother called mary?
and his brethren, james, and joses, and simon, and judas?
and his sisters, are they not all with us?
whence then hath this man all these things?
and immediately jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and said unto him, o thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?
then came to jesus scribes and pharisees, which were of jerusalem, saying, why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders?
but he answered and said unto them, why do ye also transgress the commandment of god by your tradition?
then came his disciples, and said unto him, knowest thou that the pharisees were offended, after they heard this saying?
and jesus said, are ye also yet without understanding?
do not ye yet understand, that whatsoever entereth in at the mouth goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the draught?
and his disciples say unto him, whence should we have so much bread in the wilderness, as to fill so great a multitude?
and jesus saith unto them, how many loaves have ye?
o ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the times?
which when jesus perceived, he said unto them, o ye of little faith, why reason ye among yourselves, because ye have brought no bread?
do ye not yet understand, neither remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? neither the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
how is it that ye do not understand that i spake it not to you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of the pharisees and of the sadducees?
when jesus came into the coasts of caesarea philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, whom do men say that i the son of man am?
he saith unto them, but whom say ye that i am?
for what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?
or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
and his disciples asked him, saying, why then say the scribes that elias must first come?
then jesus answered and said, o faithless and perverse generation, how long shall i be with you?
how long shall i suffer you?
then came the disciples to jesus apart, and said, why could not we cast him out?
and when they were come to capernaum, they that received tribute money came to peter, and said, doth not your master pay tribute?
and when he was come into the house, jesus prevented him, saying, what thinkest thou, simon?
of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute?
of their own children, or of strangers?
at the same time came the disciples unto jesus, saying, who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?
how think ye?
if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray?
then came peter to him, and said, lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and i forgive him?
till seven times?
then his lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, o thou wicked servant, i forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me: shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellowservant, even as i had pity on thee?
the pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?and he answered and said unto them, have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female, and said, for this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?
they say unto him, why did moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away?
and, behold, one came and said unto him, good master, what good thing shall i do, that i may have eternal life?
and he said unto him, why callest thou me good?
he saith unto him, which?
the young man saith unto him, all these things have i kept from my youth up: what lack i yet?
when his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, who then can be saved?
then answered peter and said unto him, behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have therefore?
and about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and saith unto them, why stand ye here all the day idle?
but he answered one of them, and said, friend, i do thee no wrong: didst not thou agree with me for a penny?
is it not lawful for me to do what i will with mine own?
is thine eye evil, because i am good?
and he said unto her, what wilt thou?
are ye able to drink of the cup that i shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that i am baptized with?
and jesus stood still, and called them, and said, what will ye that i shall do unto you?
and when he was come into jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying, who is this?
and when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and saying, hosanna to the son of david; they were sore displeased, and said unto him, hearest thou what these say?
and jesus saith unto them, yea; have ye never read, out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?
and when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, by what authority doest thou these things?
and who gave thee this authority?
the baptism of john, whence was it?
from heaven, or of men?
and they reasoned with themselves, saying, if we shall say, from heaven; he will say unto us, why did ye not then believe him?
but what think ye?
whether of them twain did the will of his father?
when the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen?
jesus saith unto them, did ye never read in the scriptures, the stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?
and when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment: and he saith unto him, friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment?
tell us therefore, what thinkest thou?
is it lawful to give tribute unto caesar, or not?
but jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?
and he saith unto them, whose is this image and superscription?
therefore in the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seven?
but as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by god, saying, i am the god of abraham, and the god of isaac, and the god of jacob?
then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question, tempting him, and saying, master, which is the great commandment in the law?
while the pharisees were gathered together, jesus asked them, saying, what think ye of christ?
whose son is he?
he saith unto them, how then doth david in spirit call him lord, saying, the lord said unto my lord, sit thou on my right hand, till i make thine enemies thy footstool?
if david then call him lord, how is he his son?
ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?
ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift?
ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?
and jesus said unto them, see ye not all these things?
and as he sat upon the mount of olives, the disciples came unto him privately, saying, tell us, when shall these things be?
and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?
who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season?
then shall the righteous answer him, saying, lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee?
or thirsty, and gave thee drink? when saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in?
or naked, and clothed thee?
or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?
then shall they also answer him, saying, lord, when saw we thee an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?
but when his disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying, to what purpose is this waste?
when jesus understood it, he said unto them, why trouble ye the woman?
then one of the twelve, called judas iscariot, went unto the chief priests, and said unto them, what will ye give me, and i will deliver him unto you?
now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to jesus, saying unto him, where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover?
and they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him, lord, is it i?
then judas, which betrayed him, answered and said, master, is it i?
and he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and saith unto peter, what, could ye not watch with me one hour?
and jesus said unto him, friend, wherefore art thou come?
thinkest thou that i cannot now pray to my father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?
but how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? in that same hour said jesus to the multitudes, are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me?
and the high priest arose, and said unto him, answerest thou nothing?
what is it which these witness against thee?
then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, he hath spoken blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses?
what think ye?
then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him; and others smote him with the palms of their hands, saying, prophesy unto us, thou christ, who is he that smote thee?
and they said, what is that to us?
and jesus stood before the governor: and the governor asked him, saying, art thou the king of the jews?
then said pilate unto him, hearest thou not how many things they witness against thee?
therefore when they were gathered together, pilate said unto them, whom will ye that i release unto you?
barabbas, or jesus which is called christ?
the governor answered and said unto them, whether of the twain will ye that i release unto you?
pilate saith unto them, what shall i do then with jesus which is called christ?
and the governor said, why, what evil hath he done?
and about the ninth hour jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, eli, eli, lama sabachthani?
that is to say, my god, my god, why hast thou forsaken me?
and there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out, saying, let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou jesus of nazareth?
art thou come to destroy us?
and they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among themselves, saying, what thing is this?
what new doctrine is this?
but there was certain of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts, why doth this man thus speak blasphemies?
who can forgive sins but god only?
and immediately when jesus perceived in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, he said unto them, why reason ye these things in your hearts?
whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, arise, and take up thy bed, and walk?
and when the scribes and pharisees saw him eat with publicans and sinners, they said unto his disciples, how is it that he eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners?
and the disciples of john and of the pharisees used to fast: and they come and say unto him, why do the disciples of john and of the pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not?
and jesus said unto them, can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them?
and the pharisees said unto him, behold, why do they on the sabbath day that which is not lawful?
and he said unto them, have ye never read what david did, when he had need, and was an hungred, he, and they that were with him?
how he went into the house of god in the days of abiathar the high priest, and did eat the shewbread, which is not lawful to eat but for the priests, and gave also to them which were with him?
and he saith unto them, is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil?
to save life, or to kill?
and he called them unto him, and said unto them in parables, how can satan cast out satan?
and he answered them, saying, who is my mother, or my brethren?
and he said unto them, know ye not this parable?
and how then will ye know all parables?
and he said unto them, is a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or under a bed?
and not to be set on a candlestick?
and he said, whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of god?
or with what comparison shall we compare it?
and he was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a pillow: and they awake him, and say unto him, master, carest thou not that we perish?
and he said unto them, why are ye so fearful?
how is it that ye have no faith?
and they feared exceedingly, and said one to another, what manner of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?
but when he saw jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped him, and cried with a loud voice, and said, what have i to do with thee, jesus, thou son of the most high god?
and he asked him, what is thy name?
and jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the press, and said, who touched my clothes?
and his disciples said unto him, thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, who touched me?
while he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue's house certain which said, thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the master any further?
and when he was come in, he saith unto them, why make ye this ado, and weep?
and when the sabbath day was come, he began to teach in the synagogue: and many hearing him were astonished, saying, from whence hath this man these things?
and what wisdom is this which is given unto him, that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands? is not this the carpenter, the son of mary, the brother of james, and joses, and of juda, and simon?
and are not his sisters here with us?
and she went forth, and said unto her mother, what shall i ask?
and they say unto him, shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of bread, and give them to eat?
he saith unto them, how many loaves have ye? then the pharisees and scribes asked him, why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands?
and he saith unto them, are ye so without understanding also?
do ye not perceive, that whatsoever thing from without entereth into the man, it cannot defile him; because it entereth not into his heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the draught, purging all meats?
and his disciples answered him, from whence can a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness?
and he asked them, how many loaves have ye?
and he sighed deeply in his spirit, and saith, why doth this generation seek after a sign?
and when jesus knew it, he saith unto them, why reason ye, because ye have no bread?
perceive ye not yet, neither understand?have ye your heart yet hardened?
having eyes, see ye not?
and having ears, hear ye not?
and do ye not remember?
when i brake the five loaves among five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up?
and when the seven among four thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up?
and he said unto them, how is it that ye do not understand?
and jesus went out, and his disciples, into the towns of caesarea philippi: and by the way he asked his disciples, saying unto them, whom do men say that i am?
and he saith unto them, but whom say ye that i am?
for what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?
or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
and they asked him, saying, why say the scribes that elias must first come?
and he asked the scribes, what question ye with them?
he answereth him, and saith, o faithless generation, how long shall i be with you?
how long shall i suffer you?
and he asked his father, how long is it ago since this came unto him?
and when he was come into the house, his disciples asked him privately, why could not we cast him out?
and he came to capernaum: and being in the house he asked them, what was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way?
salt is good: but if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith will ye season it?
and the pharisees came to him, and asked him, is it lawful for a man to put away his wife?
and he answered and said unto them, what did moses command you?
and when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked him, good master, what shall i do that i may inherit eternal life?
and jesus said unto him, why callest thou me good?
and they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, who then can be saved?
and he said unto them, what would ye that i should do for you?
but jesus said unto them, ye know not what ye ask: can ye drink of the cup that i drink of?
and be baptized with the baptism that i am baptized with?
and jesus answered and said unto him, what wilt thou that i should do unto thee?
and if any man say unto you, why do ye this?
and certain of them that stood there said unto them, what do ye, loosing the colt?
and he taught, saying unto them, is it not written, my house shall be called of all nations the house of prayer?
and they come again to jerusalem: and as he was walking in the temple, there come to him the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders, and say unto him, by what authority doest thou these things?
and who gave thee this authority to do these things?
the baptism of john, was it from heaven, or of men?
and they reasoned with themselves, saying, if we shall say, from heaven; he will say, why then did ye not believe him?
what shall therefore the lord of the vineyard do?
and have ye not read this scripture; the stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner: this was the lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?
and when they were come, they say unto him, master, we know that thou art true, and carest for no man: for thou regardest not the person of men, but teachest the way of god in truth: is it lawful to give tribute to caesar, or not?
shall we give, or shall we not give?
but he, knowing their hypocrisy, said unto them, why tempt ye me?
and he saith unto them, whose is this image and superscription?
in the resurrection therefore, when they shall rise, whose wife shall she be of them?
and jesus answering said unto them, do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the scriptures, neither the power of god?
and as touching the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in the book of moses, how in the bush god spake unto him, saying, i am the god of abraham, and the god of isaac, and the god of jacob?
and one of the scribes came, and having heard them reasoning together, and perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him, which is the first commandment of all?
and jesus answered and said, while he taught in the temple, how say the scribes that christ is the son of david?
david therefore himself calleth him lord; and whence is he then his son?and jesus answering said unto him, seest thou these great buildings?
and as he sat upon the mount of olives over against the temple, peter and james and john and andrew asked him privately, tell us, when shall these things be?
and what shall be the sign when all these things shall be fulfilled?
and there were some that had indignation within themselves, and said, why was this waste of the ointment made?
and jesus said, let her alone; why trouble ye her?
and the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the passover, his disciples said unto him, where wilt thou that we go and prepare that thou mayest eat the passover?
and wheresoever he shall go in, say ye to the goodman of the house, the master saith, where is the guestchamber, where i shall eat the passover with my disciples?
and they began to be sorrowful, and to say unto him one by one, is it i?
and another said, is it i?
and he cometh, and findeth them sleeping, and saith unto peter, simon, sleepest thou?
couldest not thou watch one hour?
and jesus answered and said unto them, are ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and with staves to take me?
and the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked jesus, saying, answerest thou nothing?
what is it which these witness against thee?
again the high priest asked him, and said unto him, art thou the christ, the son of the blessed?
then the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, what need we any further witnesses?
ye have heard the blasphemy: what think ye?
and pilate asked him, art thou the king of the jews?
and pilate asked him again, saying, answerest thou nothing?
but pilate answered them, saying, will ye that i release unto you the king of the jews?
and pilate answered and said again unto them, what will ye then that i shall do unto him whom ye call the king of the jews?
then pilate said unto them, why, what evil hath he done?
and at the ninth hour jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, eloi, eloi, lama sabachthani?
which is, being interpreted, my god, my god, why hast thou forsaken me?
and they said among themselves, who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the sepulchre?
and zacharias said unto the angel, whereby shall i know this?
then said mary unto the angel, how shall this be, seeing i know not a man?
and whence is this to me, that the mother of my lord should come to me?
and when they saw him, they were amazed: and his mother said unto him, son, why hast thou thus dealt with us?
and he said unto them, how is it that ye sought me?
wist ye not that i must be about my father's business?
then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him, o generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
and the people asked him, saying, what shall we do then?
then came also publicans to be baptized, and said unto him, master, what shall we do?
and the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, and what shall we do?
and they said, is not this joseph's son?
and in the synagogue there was a man, which had a spirit of an unclean devil, and cried out with a loud voice, saying, let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou jesus of nazareth?
art thou come to destroy us?
and the scribes and the pharisees began to reason, saying, who is this which speaketh blasphemies?
who can forgive sins, but god alone?but when jesus perceived their thoughts, he answering said unto them, what reason ye in your hearts?
whether is easier, to say, thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, rise up and walk?
but their scribes and pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying, why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners?
and they said unto him, why do the disciples of john fast often, and make prayers, and likewise the disciples of the pharisees; but thine eat and drink?
and he said unto them, can ye make the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them?
and certain of the pharisees said unto them, why do ye that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath days?
and jesus answering them said, have ye not read so much as this, what david did, when himself was an hungred, and they which were with him; how he went into the house of god, and did take and eat the shewbread, and gave also to them that were with him; which it is not lawful to eat but for the priests alone?
then said jesus unto them, i will ask you one thing; is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good, or to do evil?
to save life, or to destroy it?
for if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye?
and if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank have ye?
and if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye?
and he spake a parable unto them, can the blind lead the blind?shall they not both fall into the ditch?
and why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye?
either how canst thou say to thy brother, brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is in thine own eye?
and why call ye me, lord, lord, and do not the things which i say?
and john calling unto him two of his disciples sent them to jesus, saying, art thou he that should come?
or look we for another?when the men were come unto him, they said, john baptist hath sent us unto thee, saying, art thou he that should come?
or look we for another?
and when the messengers of john were departed, he began to speak unto the people concerning john, what went ye out into the wilderness for to see?
a reed shaken with the wind? but what went ye out for to see?
a man clothed in soft raiment?
but what went ye out for to see?
a prophet?
and the lord said, whereunto then shall i liken the men of this generation?
and to what are they like?tell me therefore, which of them will love him most?
and he turned to the woman, and said unto simon, seest thou this woman?
and they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves, who is this that forgiveth sins also?
and his disciples asked him, saying, what might this parable be?
and he said unto them, where is your faith?
when he saw jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and with a loud voice said, what have i to do with thee, jesus, thou son of god most high?
)and jesus asked him, saying, what is thy name?
and jesus said, who touched me?
when all denied, peter and they that were with him said, master, the multitude throng thee and press thee, and sayest thou, who touched me?
and herod said, john have i beheaded: but who is this, of whom i hear such things?
and it came to pass, as he was alone praying, his disciples were with him: and he asked them, saying, whom say the people that i am?
he said unto them, but whom say ye that i am?
for what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and lose himself, or be cast away?
and jesus answering said, o faithless and perverse generation, how long shall i be with you, and suffer you?
and when his disciples james and john saw this, they said, lord, wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as elias did?
and, behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying, master, what shall i do to inherit eternal life?
he said unto him, what is written in the law?
how readest thou?
but he, willing to justify himself, said unto jesus, and who is my neighbour?
which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves?
but martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and said, lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone?
and he said unto them, which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, friend, lend me three loaves; for a friend of mine in his journey is come to me, and i have nothing to set before him?
if a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone?
or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent?
or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion?
if ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children: how much more shall your heavenly father give the holy spirit to them that ask him?
if satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand?
and if i by beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast them out?
ye fools, did not he that made that which is without make that which is within also?
are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before god?
and he said unto him, man, who made me a judge or a divider over you?
and he spake a parable unto them, saying, the ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully: and he thought within himself, saying, what shall i do, because i have no room where to bestow my fruits?
but god said unto him, thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided?
consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor reap; which neither have storehouse nor barn; and god feedeth them: how much more are ye better than the fowls?
and which of you with taking thought can add to his stature one cubit?
if ye then be not able to do that thing which is least, why take ye thought for the rest?
if then god so clothe the grass, which is to day in the field, and to morrow is cast into the oven; how much more will he clothe you, o ye of little faith?
then peter said unto him, lord, speakest thou this parable unto us, or even to all?
and the lord said, who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his lord shall make ruler over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season?
i am come to send fire on the earth; and what will i, if it be already kindled?
suppose ye that i am come to give peace on earth?
ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth; but how is it that ye do not discern this time?
yea, and why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right?
and jesus answering said unto them, suppose ye that these galilaeans were sinners above all the galilaeans, because they suffered such things?
or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in siloam fell, and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in jerusalem?
then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, behold, these three years i come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground?
the lord then answered him, and said, thou hypocrite, doth not each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead him away to watering?
and ought not this woman, being a daughter of abraham, whom satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day?
then said he, unto what is the kingdom of god like?
and whereunto shall i resemble it?
and again he said, whereunto shall i liken the kingdom of god?
then said one unto him, lord, are there few that be saved?
and jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and pharisees, saying, is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day?
and he took him, and healed him, and let him go; and answered them, saying, which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the sabbath day?
for which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it?
or what king, going to make war against another king, sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand?
salt is good: but if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be seasoned?
and he spake this parable unto them, saying, what man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it?
either what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece, doth not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till she find it?
and he called him, and said unto him, how is it that i hear this of thee?
then the steward said within himself, what shall i do?
so he called every one of his lord's debtors unto him, and said unto the first, how much owest thou unto my lord?
then said he to another, and how much owest thou?
if therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches?
and if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give you that which is your own?
but which of you, having a servant plowing or feeding cattle, will say unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, go and sit down to meat?
and will not rather say unto him, make ready wherewith i may sup, and gird thyself, and serve me, till i have eaten and drunken; and afterward thou shalt eat and drink?
doth he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded him?
and jesus answering said, were there not ten cleansed?
but where are the nine?
and they answered and said unto him, where, lord?
and shall not god avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them?
nevertheless when the son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?
and a certain ruler asked him, saying, good master, what shall i do to inherit eternal life?
and jesus said unto him, why callest thou me good?
and they that heard it said, who then can be saved?
and jesus stood, and commanded him to be brought unto him: and when he was come near, he asked him, saying, what wilt thou that i shall do unto thee?
thou knewest that i was an austere man, taking up that i laid not down, and reaping that i did not sow: wherefore then gavest not thou my money into the bank, that at my coming i might have required mine own with usury?
and if any man ask you, why do ye loose him?
and as they were loosing the colt, the owners thereof said unto them, why loose ye the colt?
and it came to pass, that on one of those days, as he taught the people in the temple, and preached the gospel, the chief priests and the scribes came upon him with the elders, and spake unto him, saying, tell us, by what authority doest thou these things?
or who is he that gave thee this authority?
and he answered and said unto them, i will also ask you one thing; and answer me: the baptism of john, was it from heaven, or of men?
and they reasoned with themselves, saying, if we shall say, from heaven; he will say, why then believed ye him not?
then said the lord of the vineyard, what shall i do?
what therefore shall the lord of the vineyard do unto them?
and he beheld them, and said, what is this then that is written, the stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner?
and they asked him, saying, master, we know that thou sayest and teachest rightly, neither acceptest thou the person of any, but teachest the way of god truly: is it lawful for us to give tribute unto caesar, or no?
but he perceived their craftiness, and said unto them, why tempt ye me?
whose image and superscription hath it?
therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them is she?
and he said unto them, how say they that christ is david's son?
david therefore calleth him lord, how is he then his son?
and they asked him, saying, master, but when shall these things be?
and what sign will there be when these things shall come to pass? and they said unto him, where wilt thou that we prepare?
and ye shall say unto the goodman of the house, the master saith unto thee, where is the guestchamber, where i shall eat the passover with my disciples?
for whether is greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he that serveth?
is not he that sitteth at meat? and he said unto them, when i sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing?
and when he rose up from prayer, and was come to his disciples, he found them sleeping for sorrow, and said unto them, why sleep ye?
but jesus said unto him, judas, betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss?
when they which were about him saw what would follow, they said unto him, lord, shall we smite with the sword?
then jesus said unto the chief priests, and captains of the temple, and the elders, which were come to him, be ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and staves?
and when they had blindfolded him, they struck him on the face, and asked him, saying, prophesy, who is it that smote thee?
and as soon as it was day, the elders of the people and the chief priests and the scribes came together, and led him into their council, saying, art thou the christ?
then said they all, art thou then the son of god?
and they said, what need we any further witness?
and pilate asked him, saying, art thou the king of the jews?
and he said unto them the third time, why, what evil hath he done?
for if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry?
but the other answering rebuked him, saying, dost not thou fear god, seeing thou art in the same condemnation?
and it came to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two men stood by them in shining garments: and as they were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth, they said unto them, why seek ye the living among the dead?
and he said unto them, what manner of communications are these that ye have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad?
and the one of them, whose name was cleopas, answering said unto him, art thou only a stranger in jerusalem, and hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these days?
and he said unto them, what things?
then he said unto them, o fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken: ought not christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
and they said one to another, did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?
and he said unto them, why are ye troubled?
and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?
and while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them, have ye here any meat?
and this is the record of john, when the jews sent priests and levites from jerusalem to ask him, who art thou?
and they asked him, what then?
art thou elias?
art thou that prophet?
then said they unto him, who art thou?
what sayest thou of thyself?
and they asked him, and said unto him, why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that christ, nor elias, neither that prophet?
then jesus turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them, what seek ye?
they said unto him, rabbi, (which is to say, being interpreted, master,) where dwellest thou?
and nathanael said unto him, can there any good thing come out of nazareth?
nathanael saith unto him, whence knowest thou me?
jesus answered and said unto him, because i said unto thee, i saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou?
jesus saith unto her, woman, what have i to do with thee?
then answered the jews and said unto him, what sign shewest thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these things?
then said the jews, forty and six years was this temple in building, and wilt thou rear it up in three days?
nicodemus saith unto him, how can a man be born when he is old?can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be born?
nicodemus answered and said unto him, how can these things be?jesus answered and said unto him, art thou a master of israel, and knowest not these things?
if i have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if i tell you of heavenly things?
 then saith the woman of samaria unto him, how is it that thou, being a jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of samaria?
the woman saith unto him, sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the well is deep: from whence then hast thou that living water?art thou greater than our father jacob, which gave us the well, and drank thereof himself, and his children, and his cattle?
and upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked with the woman: yet no man said, what seekest thou?
or, why talkest thou with her?
the woman then left her waterpot, and went her way into the city, and saith to the men, come, see a man, which told me all things that ever i did: is not this the christ?
therefore said the disciples one to another, hath any man brought him ought to eat?
say not ye, there are yet four months, and then cometh harvest?
when jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time in that case, he saith unto him, wilt thou be made whole?
then asked they him, what man is that which said unto thee, take up thy bed, and walk?
how can ye believe, which receive honour one of another, and seek not the honour that cometh from god only?
but if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?
when jesus then lifted up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he saith unto philip, whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat?
one of his disciples, andrew, simon peter's brother, saith unto him, there is a lad here, which hath five barley loaves, and two small fishes: but what are they among so many?
and when they had found him on the other side of the sea, they said unto him, rabbi, when camest thou hither?
then said they unto him, what shall we do, that we might work the works of god?
they said therefore unto him, what sign shewest thou then, that we may see, and believe thee?
what dost thou work?
and they said, is not this jesus, the son of joseph, whose father and mother we know?
how is it then that he saith, i came down from heaven?
the jews therefore strove among themselves, saying, how can this man give us his flesh to eat?
many therefore of his disciples, when they had heard this, said, this is an hard saying; who can hear it?
when jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it, he said unto them, doth this offend you?
what and if ye shall see the son of man ascend up where he was before?
then said jesus unto the twelve, will ye also go away?
then simon peter answered him, lord, to whom shall we go?
jesus answered them, have not i chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil?
then the jews sought him at the feast, and said, where is he?
and the jews marvelled, saying, how knoweth this man letters, having never learned?
did not moses give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the law?
why go ye about to kill me? the people answered and said, thou hast a devil: who goeth about to kill thee?
if a man on the sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of moses should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because i have made a man every whit whole on the sabbath day?
then said some of them of jerusalem, is not this he, whom they seek to kill?
do the rulers know indeed that this is the very christ?
and many of the people believed on him, and said, when christ cometh, will he do more miracles than these which this man hath done?
then said the jews among themselves, whither will he go, that we shall not find him?
will he go unto the dispersed among the gentiles, and teach the gentiles?
what manner of saying is this that he said, ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where i am, thither ye cannot come?
but some said, shall christ come out of galilee?
hath not the scripture said, that christ cometh of the seed of david, and out of the town of bethlehem, where david was?
then came the officers to the chief priests and pharisees; and they said unto them, why have ye not brought him?
then answered them the pharisees, are ye also deceived? have any of the rulers or of the pharisees believed on him?
nicodemus saith unto them, (he that came to jesus by night, being one of them,) doth our law judge any man, before it hear him, and know what he doeth?
they answered and said unto him, art thou also of galilee?
now moses in the law commanded us, that such should be stoned: but what sayest thou?
when jesus had lifted up himself, and saw none but the woman, he said unto her, woman, where are those thine accusers?
hath no man condemned thee?
then said they unto him, where is thy father?
then said the jews, will he kill himself?
then said they unto him, who art thou?
they answered him, we be abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man: how sayest thou, ye shall be made free?
why do ye not understand my speech?
which of you convinceth me of sin?
and if i say the truth, why do ye not believe me?
then answered the jews, and said unto him, say we not well that thou art a samaritan, and hast a devil?
art thou greater than our father abraham, which is dead?
and the prophets are dead: whom makest thou thyself?
then said the jews unto him, thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen abraham?
and his disciples asked him, saying, master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?
the neighbours therefore, and they which before had seen him that he was blind, said, is not this he that sat and begged?
therefore said they unto him, how were thine eyes opened?
then said they unto him, where is he?
others said, how can a man that is a sinner do such miracles?
they say unto the blind man again, what sayest thou of him, that he hath opened thine eyes?
and they asked them, saying, is this your son, who ye say was born blind?
how then doth he now see?
then said they to him again, what did he to thee?
how opened he thine eyes?
he answered them, i have told you already, and ye did not hear: wherefore would ye hear it again?
will ye also be his disciples?
they answered and said unto him, thou wast altogether born in sins, and dost thou teach us?
jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found him, he said unto him, dost thou believe on the son of god?
he answered and said, who is he, lord, that i might believe on him?
and some of the pharisees which were with him heard these words, and said unto him, are we blind also?
and many of them said, he hath a devil, and is mad; why hear ye him?
can a devil open the eyes of the blind?
then came the jews round about him, and said unto him, how long dost thou make us to doubt?
jesus answered them, many good works have i shewed you from my father; for which of those works do ye stone me?
jesus answered them, is it not written in your law, i said, ye are gods?
if he called them gods, unto whom the word of god came, and the scripture cannot be broken; say ye of him, whom the father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, thou blasphemest; because i said, i am the son of god?
his disciples say unto him, master, the jews of late sought to stone thee; and goest thou thither again?
jesus answered, are there not twelve hours in the day?
believest thou this?
and said, where have ye laid him?
and some of them said, could not this man, which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man should not have died?
jesus saith unto her, said i not unto thee, that, if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of god?
then gathered the chief priests and the pharisees a council, and said, what do we?
then sought they for jesus, and spake among themselves, as they stood in the temple, what think ye, that he will not come to the feast?
then saith one of his disciples, judas iscariot, simon's son, which should betray him, why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor?
the pharisees therefore said among themselves, perceive ye how ye prevail nothing?
now is my soul troubled; and what shall i say?
the people answered him, we have heard out of the law that christ abideth for ever: and how sayest thou, the son of man must be lifted up?
who is this son of man?
but though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him: that the saying of esaias the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spake, lord, who hath believed our report?
and to whom hath the arm of the lord been revealed?
then cometh he to simon peter: and peter saith unto him, lord, dost thou wash my feet?
so after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again, he said unto them, know ye what i have done to you?
he then lying on jesus' breast saith unto him, lord, who is it?
simon peter said unto him, lord, whither goest thou?
peter said unto him, lord, why cannot i follow thee now?
jesus answered him, wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake?
thomas saith unto him, lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way?
jesus saith unto him, have i been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, philip?
he that hath seen me hath seen the father; and how sayest thou then, shew us the father?
believest thou not that i am in the father, and the father in me?
judas saith unto him, not iscariot, lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?
but now i go my way to him that sent me; and none of you asketh me, whither goest thou?
then said some of his disciples among themselves, what is this that he saith unto us, a little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me: and, because i go to the father?
they said therefore, what is this that he saith, a little while?
now jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and said unto them, do ye enquire among yourselves of that i said, a little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me?
jesus answered them, do ye now believe?
jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him, went forth, and said unto them, whom seek ye?
then asked he them again, whom seek ye?
then said jesus unto peter, put up thy sword into the sheath: the cup which my father hath given me, shall i not drink it?
then saith the damsel that kept the door unto peter, art not thou also one of this man's disciples?
why askest thou me?
and when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by struck jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, answerest thou the high priest so?
jesus answered him, if i have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou me?
they said therefore unto him, art not thou also one of his disciples?
one of the servants of the high priest, being his kinsman whose ear peter cut off, saith, did not i see thee in the garden with him?
pilate then went out unto them, and said, what accusation bring ye against this man?
then pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and called jesus, and said unto him, art thou the king of the jews?
jesus answered him, sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me?
pilate answered, am i a jew?
thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered thee unto me: what hast thou done?
pilate therefore said unto him, art thou a king then?
pilate saith unto him, what is truth?
but ye have a custom, that i should release unto you one at the passover: will ye therefore that i release unto you the king of the jews?
when pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid; and went again into the judgment hall, and saith unto jesus, whence art thou?
then saith pilate unto him, speakest thou not unto me?
knowest thou not that i have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee?
pilate saith unto them, shall i crucify your king?
and they say unto her, woman, why weepest thou?
jesus saith unto her, woman, why weepest thou?
whom seekest thou?
then jesus saith unto them, children, have ye any meat?
and none of the disciples durst ask him, who art thou?
so when they had dined, jesus saith to simon peter, simon, son of jonas, lovest thou me more than these?
he saith to him again the second time, simon, son of jonas, lovest thou me?
he saith unto him the third time, simon, son of jonas, lovest thou me?
peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, lovest thou me?
then peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom jesus loved following; which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, lord, which is he that betrayeth thee?
peter seeing him saith to jesus, lord, and what shall this man do?
jesus saith unto him, if i will that he tarry till i come, what is that to thee?
then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet jesus said not unto him, he shall not die; but, if i will that he tarry till i come, what is that to thee?
when they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to israel?
and while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel; which also said, ye men of galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven?
and they were all amazed and marvelled, saying one to another, behold, are not all these which speak galilaeans?
and how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born?
and they were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying one to another, what meaneth this?
now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto peter and to the rest of the apostles, men and brethren, what shall we do?
and when peter saw it, he answered unto the people, ye men of israel, why marvel ye at this?
or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to walk?
and when they had set them in the midst, they asked, by what power, or by what name, have ye done this?
but when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council, they conferred among themselves, saying, what shall we do to these men?
and when they heard that, they lifted up their voice to god with one accord, and said, lord, thou art god, which hast made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is: who by the mouth of thy servant david hast said, why did the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things?
but peter said, ananias, why hath satan filled thine heart to lie to the holy ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?whiles it remained, was it not thine own?
and after it was sold, was it not in thine own power?
why hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart?
and peter answered unto her, tell me whether ye sold the land for so much?
then peter said unto her, how is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the spirit of the lord?
and when they had brought them, they set them before the council: and the high priest asked them, saying, did not we straitly command you that ye should not teach in this name?
then said the high priest, are these things so?
and the next day he shewed himself unto them as they strove, and would have set them at one again, saying, sirs, ye are brethren; why do ye wrong one to another?
but he that did his neighbour wrong thrust him away, saying, who made thee a ruler and a judge over us?wilt thou kill me, as thou diddest the egyptian yesterday?
this moses whom they refused, saying, who made thee a ruler and a judge?
then god turned, and gave them up to worship the host of heaven; as it is written in the book of the prophets, o ye house of israel, have ye offered to me slain beasts and sacrifices by the space of forty years in the wilderness?
howbeit the most high dwelleth not in temples made with hands; as saith the prophet, heaven is my throne, and earth is my footstool: what house will ye build me?
saith the lord: or what is the place of my rest?
hath not my hand made all these things? which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted?
and philip ran thither to him, and heard him read the prophet esaias, and said, understandest thou what thou readest?
and he said, how can i, except some man should guide me?
the place of the scripture which he read was this, he was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth: in his humiliation his judgment was taken away: and who shall declare his generation?
and the eunuch answered philip, and said, i pray thee, of whom speaketh the prophet this?
of himself, or of some other man?
and as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water: and the eunuch said, see, here is water; what doth hinder me to be baptized?
and as he journeyed, he came near damascus: and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven: and he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, saul, saul, why persecutest thou me?
and he said, who art thou, lord? and he trembling and astonished said, lord, what wilt thou have me to do?
but all that heard him were amazed, and said; is not this he that destroyed them which called on this name in jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he might bring them bound unto the chief priests?
and when he looked on him, he was afraid, and said, what is it, lord?
then peter went down to the men which were sent unto him from cornelius; and said, behold, i am he whom ye seek: what is the cause wherefore ye are come?
therefore came i unto you without gainsaying, as soon as i was sent for: i ask therefore for what intent ye have sent for me?
then answered peter, can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the holy ghost as well as we?
forasmuch then as god gave them the like gift as he did unto us, who believed on the lord jesus christ; what was i, that i could withstand god?
and said, o full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the lord?
and as john fulfilled his course, he said, whom think ye that i am?
which when the apostles, barnabas and paul, heard of, they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out, and saying, sirs, why do ye these things?
now therefore why tempt ye god, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?
then he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell down before paul and silas, and brought them out, and said, sirs, what must i do to be saved?
but paul said unto them, they have beaten us openly uncondemned, being romans, and have cast us into prison; and now do they thrust us out privily?
and some said, what will this babbler say?
and they took him, and brought him unto areopagus, saying, may we know what this new doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is?
and it came to pass, that, while apollos was at corinth, paul having passed through the upper coasts came to ephesus: and finding certain disciples, he said unto them, have ye received the holy ghost since ye believed?
and he said unto them, unto what then were ye baptized?
and the evil spirit answered and said, jesus i know, and paul i know; but who are ye?
and when the townclerk had appeased the people, he said, ye men of ephesus, what man is there that knoweth not how that the city of the ephesians is a worshipper of the great goddess diana, and of the image which fell down from jupiter?
then paul answered, what mean ye to weep and to break mine heart?
what is it therefore?
and as paul was to be led into the castle, he said unto the chief captain, may i speak unto thee?
who said, canst thou speak greek?
art not thou that egyptian, which before these days madest an uproar, and leddest out into the wilderness four thousand men that were murderers?
and i fell unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me, saul, saul, why persecutest thou me?
and i answered, who art thou, lord?
and i said, what shall i do, lord?
and now why tarriest thou?
and as they bound him with thongs, paul said unto the centurion that stood by, is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a roman, and uncondemned?
then the chief captain came, and said unto him, tell me, art thou a roman?
then said paul unto him, god shall smite thee, thou whited wall: for sittest thou to judge me after the law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law?
and they that stood by said, revilest thou god's high priest?
then the chief captain took him by the hand, and went with him aside privately, and asked him, what is that thou hast to tell me?
but festus, willing to do the jews a pleasure, answered paul, and said, wilt thou go up to jerusalem, and there be judged of these things before me?
then festus, when he had conferred with the council, answered, hast thou appealed unto caesar?
why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that god should raise the dead?
and when we were all fallen to the earth, i heard a voice speaking unto me, and saying in the hebrew tongue, saul, saul, why persecutest thou me?
and i said, who art thou, lord?
king agrippa, believest thou the prophets?
and thinkest thou this, o man, that judgest them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of god?
or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering; not knowing that the goodness of god leadeth thee to repentance?
thou therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself?thou that preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal? thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery?
thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege? thou that makest thy boast of the law, through breaking the law dishonourest thou god?
therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision? and shall not uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfil the law, judge thee, who by the letter and circumcision dost transgress the law?
what advantage then hath the jew?
or what profit is there of circumcision?
for what if some did not believe?
shall their unbelief make the faith of god without effect?
but if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of god, what shall we say?
is god unrighteous who taketh vengeance?
(i speak as a man) god forbid: for then how shall god judge the world?
for if the truth of god hath more abounded through my lie unto his glory; why yet am i also judged as a sinner?
and not rather, (as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say,) let us do evil, that good may come?
what then?
are we better than they?
where is boasting then?
by what law?
of works?
is he the god of the jews only?
is he not also of the gentiles?
do we then make void the law through faith?
what shall we say then that abraham our father, as pertaining to the flesh, hath found?
for what saith the scripture?
cometh this blessedness then upon the circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also?
how was it then reckoned?
when he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision?
what shall we say then?
shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound?
how shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?
know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into jesus christ were baptized into his death?
what then?
shall we sin, because we are not under the law, but under grace?
know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?
what fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed?
know ye not, brethren, (for i speak to them that know the law,)
how that the law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth?
what shall we say then?
is the law sin?
was then that which is good made death unto me?
who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
for we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for?
what shall we then say to these things?
if god be for us, who can be against us?
he that spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
who shall lay any thing to the charge of god's elect? who is he that condemneth?
who shall separate us from the love of christ?
shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?
what shall we say then?
is there unrighteousness with god?
thou wilt say then unto me, why doth he yet find fault?
for who hath resisted his will?
nay but, o man, who art thou that repliest against god?
shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why hast thou made me thus?
hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour?
what if god, willing to shew his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: and that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had afore prepared unto glory, even us, whom he hath called, not of the jews only, but also of the gentiles?
what shall we say then?
wherefore?
but the righteousness which is of faith speaketh on this wise, say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven?
(that is, to bring christ down from above:) or, who shall descend into the deep?
)but what saith it?
how then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?
and how shall they hear without a preacher?
and how shall they preach, except they be sent?
for esaias saith, lord, who hath believed our report?
but i say, have they not heard?
but i say, did not israel know?
i say then, hath god cast away his people?
wot ye not what the scripture saith of elias?
but what saith the answer of god unto him?
what then?
i say then, have they stumbled that they should fall?
now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the gentiles; how much more their fulness?
for if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead?
for if thou wert cut out of the olive tree which is wild by nature, and wert graffed contrary to nature into a good olive tree: how much more shall these, which be the natural branches, be graffed into their own olive tree?
for who hath known the mind of the lord?
or who hath been his counsellor?
or who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again?
wilt thou then not be afraid of the power?
who art thou that judgest another man's servant?
but why dost thou judge thy brother?
or why dost thou set at nought thy brother?
hast thou faith?
is christ divided?
was paul crucified for you?
or were ye baptized in the name of paul?
where is the wise?
where is the scribe?
where is the disputer of this world?
hath not god made foolish the wisdom of this world?
for what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him?
for who hath known the mind of the lord, that he may instruct him?
for ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?
for while one saith, i am of paul; and another, i am of apollos; are ye not carnal?
who then is paul, and who is apollos, but ministers by whom ye believed, even as the lord gave to every man?
know ye not that ye are the temple of god, and that the spirit of god dwelleth in you?
for who maketh thee to differ from another?
and what hast thou that thou didst not receive?
now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it?
what will ye?
shall i come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the spirit of meekness?
know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?
for what have i to do to judge them also that are without?
do not ye judge them that are within?
dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the saints?
do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world?
and if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?
know ye not that we shall judge angels?
how much more things that pertain to this life?
is it so, that there is not a wise man among you?
no, not one that shall be able to judge between his brethren?
why do ye not rather take wrong?
why do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?
know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of god?
know ye not that your bodies are the members of christ?
shall i then take the members of christ, and make them the members of an harlot?
what?
know ye not that he which is joined to an harlot is one body?
what?
know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy ghost which is in you, which ye have of god, and ye are not your own?
for what knowest thou, o wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband?
or how knowest thou, o man, whether thou shalt save thy wife?
is any man called being circumcised?
is any called in uncircumcision?
art thou called being a servant?
art thou bound unto a wife?
art thou loosed from a wife?
for if any man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the idol's temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered to idols; and through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom christ died?
am i not an apostle?
am i not free?
have i not seen jesus christ our lord?
are not ye my work in the lord?
mine answer to them that do examine me is this, have we not power to eat and to drink?
have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as other apostles, and as the brethren of the lord, and cephas?
or i only and barnabas, have not we power to forbear working?
who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges?who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof?
or who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock?
say i these things as a man?
or saith not the law the same also?
doth god take care for oxen?
or saith he it altogether for our sakes?
if we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things?
if others be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather?
do ye not know that they which minister about holy things live of the things of the temple?
and they which wait at the altar are partakers with the altar?
what is my reward then?
know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one receiveth the prize?
the cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of christ?
the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of christ?
behold israel after the flesh: are not they which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar?
what say i then?
that the idol is any thing, or that which is offered in sacrifice to idols is any thing?
do we provoke the lord to jealousy?
are we stronger than he?
but if any man say unto you, this is offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not for his sake that shewed it, and for conscience sake: for the earth is the lord's, and the fulness thereof: conscience, i say, not thine own, but of the other: for why is my liberty judged of another man's conscience?
for if i by grace be a partaker, why am i evil spoken of for that for which i give thanks?
judge in yourselves: is it comely that a woman pray unto god uncovered?
doth not even nature itself teach you, that, if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him?
what?
have ye not houses to eat and to drink in?
or despise ye the church of god, and shame them that have not?
what shall i say to you?
shall i praise you in this?
if the foot shall say, because i am not the hand, i am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?
and if the ear shall say, because i am not the eye, i am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?
if the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing?
if the whole were hearing, where were the smelling?
and if they were all one member, where were the body?
are all apostles?
are all prophets?
are all teachers?
are all workers of miracles?
have all the gifts of healing?
do all speak with tongues?
do all interpret?
now, brethren, if i come unto you speaking with tongues, what shall i profit you, except i shall speak to you either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine?
and even things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or harped?
for if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle?
so likewise ye, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken?
what is it then?
else when thou shalt bless with the spirit, how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned say amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest?
if therefore the whole church be come together into one place, and all speak with tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad?
how is it then, brethren?
what?
came the word of god out from you?
or came it unto you only?
now if christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?
else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all?
why are they then baptized for the dead? and why stand we in jeopardy every hour?
if after the manner of men i have fought with beasts at ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not?
but some man will say, how are the dead raised up?
and with what body do they come?
o death, where is thy sting?
o grave, where is thy victory?
when i therefore was thus minded, did i use lightness?
or the things that i purpose, do i purpose according to the flesh, that with me there should be yea yea, and nay nay?
for if i make you sorry, who is he then that maketh me glad, but the same which is made sorry by me?
and who is sufficient for these things?
do we begin again to commend ourselves?
or need we, as some others, epistles of commendation to you, or letters of commendation from you?
but if the ministration of death, written and engraven in stones, was glorious, so that the children of israel could not stedfastly behold the face of moses for the glory of his countenance; which glory was to be done away: how shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious?
be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness?
and what communion hath light with darkness?
and what concord hath christ with belial?
or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel?
and what agreement hath the temple of god with idols?
do ye look on things after the outward appearance?
have i committed an offence in abasing myself that ye might be exalted, because i have preached to you the gospel of god freely?
wherefore?
because i love you not?
are they hebrews?
are they israelites?
are they the seed of abraham?
are they ministers of christ?
who is weak, and i am not weak?
who is offended, and i burn not?
for what is it wherein ye were inferior to other churches, except it be that i myself was not burdensome to you?
did i make a gain of you by any of them whom i sent unto you?
did titus make a gain of you?
walked we not in the same spirit?
walked we not in the same steps?
again, think ye that we excuse ourselves unto you?
know ye not your own selves, how that jesus christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?
for do i now persuade men, or god?
or do i seek to please men?
but when i saw that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the gospel, i said unto peter before them all, if thou, being a jew, livest after the manner of gentiles, and not as do the jews, why compellest thou the gentiles to live as do the jews?
but if, while we seek to be justified by christ, we ourselves also are found sinners, is therefore christ the minister of sin?
o foolish galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, before whose eyes jesus christ hath been evidently set forth, crucified among you?
this only would i learn of you, received ye the spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?
are ye so foolish?
having begun in the spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh?
have ye suffered so many things in vain?
he therefore that ministereth to you the spirit, and worketh miracles among you, doeth he it by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?
wherefore then serveth the law?
is the law then against the promises of god?
but now, after that ye have known god, or rather are known of god, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage?
where is then the blessedness ye spake of?
am i therefore become your enemy, because i tell you the truth?
tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law?
nevertheless what saith the scripture?
ye did run well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the truth?
and i, brethren, if i yet preach circumcision, why do i yet suffer persecution?
(now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth?
what then?
wherefore if ye be dead with christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances,  (touch not; taste not; handle not;  which all are to perish with the using;) after the commandments and doctrines of men?
for what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing?
are not even ye in the presence of our lord jesus christ at his coming?
for what thanks can we render to god again for you, for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our god; night and day praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and might perfect that which is lacking in your faith?
remember ye not, that, when i was yet with you, i told you these things?
a bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach; not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; but patient, not a brawler, not covetous; one that ruleth well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity;
(for if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the church of god?
for perhaps he therefore departed for a season, that thou shouldest receive him for ever; not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved, specially to me, but how much more unto thee, both in the flesh, and in the lord?
for unto which of the angels said he at any time, thou art my son, this day have i begotten thee?
and again, i will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son?
but to which of the angels said he at any time, sit on my right hand, until i make thine enemies thy footstool?
are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?
for if the word spoken by angels was stedfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompence of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him; god also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the holy ghost, according to his own will?
but one in a certain place testified, saying, what is man, that thou art mindful of him?
or the son of man that thou visitest him?
but with whom was he grieved forty years?
was it not with them that had sinned, whose carcases fell in the wilderness?
and to whom sware he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not?
if therefore perfection were by the levitical priesthood, (for under it the people received the law,) what further need was there that another priest should rise after the order of melchisedec, and not be called after the order of aaron?
for if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to god, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living god?
for then would they not have ceased to be offered?
he that despised moses' law died without mercy under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the son of god, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the spirit of grace?
and what shall i more say?
if ye endure chastening, god dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not?
furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the father of spirits, and live?
for if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment;
and ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto him, sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool: are ye not then partial in yourselves, and are become judges of evil thoughts?
hearken, my beloved brethren, hath not god chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that love him?
do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats?
do not they blaspheme that worthy name by the which ye are called?
what doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works?
can faith save him?
if a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit?
but wilt thou know, o vain man, that faith without works is dead?was not abraham our father justified by works, when he had offered isaac his son upon the altar?
seest thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect?
likewise also was not rahab the harlot justified by works, when she had received the messengers, and had sent them out another way?
doth a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter?
can the fig tree, my brethren, bear olive berries?either a vine, figs? who is a wise man and endued with knowledge among you?
from whence come wars and fightings among you?
come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members?
ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with god?
do ye think that the scripture saith in vain, the spirit that dwelleth in us lusteth to envy?
there is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy: who art thou that judgest another?
for what is your life?
is any among you afflicted?
is any merry?
is any sick among you?
for what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently?
and who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good?
for the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of god: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of god?
and if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?
this second epistle, beloved, i now write unto you; in both which i stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance: that ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets, and of the commandment of us the apostles of the lord and saviour: knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming?
seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness,
looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of god, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat?
who is a liar but he that denieth that jesus is the christ?and wherefore slew he him?
but whoso hath this world's good, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of god in him?
if a man say, i love god, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love god whom he hath not seen?
who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that jesus is the son of god?
and i saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice, who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?
and when he had opened the fifth seal, i saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of god, and for the testimony which they held: and they cried with a loud voice, saying, how long, o lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?
and the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains; and said to the mountains and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb: for the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?
and one of the elders answered, saying unto me, what are these which are arrayed in white robes?
and whence came they?
and they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast: and they worshipped the beast, saying, who is like unto the beast?
who is able to make war with him?
who shall not fear thee, o lord, and glorify thy name?
and the angel said unto me, wherefore didst thou marvel?